Abstract
In this paper, we propose a max-min entropy framework for reinforcement learning (RL) to overcome the limitation of the soft actor-critic (SAC) algorithm implement-ing the maximum entropy RL in model-free sample-based learning. Whereas the maximum entropy RL guides learning for policies to reach states with high entropy in the future, the proposed max-min entropy framework aims to learn to visit states with low entropy and maximize the entropy of these low-entropy states to promote better exploration. For general Markov decision processes (MDPs), an efﬁcient algorithm is constructed under the proposed max-min entropy framework based on disentanglement of exploration and exploitation. Numerical results show that the proposed algorithm yields drastic performance improvement over the current state-of-the-art RL algorithms. 1

Introduction
The maximum entropy framework has been considered in various RL domains [22, 23, 30, 45, 51, 53, 58]. Maximum entropy RL adds the expected policy entropy to the return objective of standard RL in order to maximize both the return and the entropy of policy distribution. Maximum entropy RL encourages the policy to choose multiple actions probabilistically and yields a signiﬁcant improvement in exploration and robustness and good ﬁnal performance in various control tasks
[15, 20, 21, 25, 26, 29, 50]. In particular, soft actor-critic (SAC) implements maximum entropy RL in an efﬁcient iterative manner based on soft policy iteration and guarantees convergence to the optimal policy for ﬁnite MDPs, yielding signiﬁcant performance improvement over various on-policy and off-policy recent RL algorithms in many continuous control tasks. However, we observe that such an iterative implementation of the maximum entropy strategy of optimizing for policies that aim to reach states with high entropy in the future does not necessarily result in the desired exploration behavior but may yield positive feedback hindering exploration in model-free sample-based learning with function approximation. In order to overcome such limitations associated with implementation of the maximum entropy RL, we propose a max-min entropy framework for RL, which aims to learn policies reaching states with low entropy and maximizing the entropy of these low-entropy states, whereas the conventional maximum entropy RL optimizes for policies that aim to visit states with high entropy and maximize the entropy of those high-entropy states for high entropy of the entire trajectory. We implemented the proposed max-min entropy framework into a practical iterative actor-critic algorithm based on policy iteration with disentangled exploration and exploitation. It is demonstrated that the proposed algorithm signiﬁcantly enhances exploration capability due to the fairness across states induced by the max-min framework and yields drastic performance improvement over existing RL algorithms including maximum-entropy SAC on difﬁcult control tasks. 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
2