Abstract
We provide a setting and a general approach to fair online learning with stochastic sensitive and non-sensitive contexts. The setting is a repeated game between the
Player and Nature, where at each stage both pick actions based on the contexts.
Inspired by the notion of unawareness, we assume that the Player can only access the non-sensitive context before making a decision, while we discuss both cases of
Nature accessing the sensitive contexts and Nature unaware of the sensitive contexts.
Adapting Blackwell’s approachability theory to handle the case of an unknown contexts’ distribution, we provide a general necessary and sufﬁcient condition for learning objectives to be compatible with some fairness constraints. This condition is instantiated on (group-wise) no-regret and (group-wise) calibration objectives, and on demographic parity as an additional constraint. When the objective is not compatible with the constraint, the provided framework permits to characterise the optimal trade-off between the two. 1

Introduction
Classically, the goal of the decision maker in sequential environment is purely performance driven — she wants to obtain as high reward as if she has had a complete information about the environment.
In contrast, algorithmic fairness shifts the attention from the performance-driven behavior by taking into account additional ethical considerations. The latter is often formalized via the notion of fairness constraint [10, 26, 6] on the decision maker’s strategies. The goal of this work is to bring to light
Blackwell’s approachability theory as a suitable theoretical formalism for fair online learning under group fairness constraints. The appealing feature of this theory is two-fold: ﬁrst, it gives explicit criteria when learning is possible; second, if this criteria is met, it comes with an explicit strategy.
It is well known that Blackwell’s approachability theory may be used to characterize online learning problems that are tractable and to design strategies to solve them—for instance, for no-regret learning or calibration. Extensive references to such uses may be found in Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi [5],
Perchet [23] and Abernethy et al. [1]. Actually, as noted by the latter two references, no-regret learning, calibration, and approachability imply each other in some sense. The main ﬁrst achievement of this article is to extend this use to online learning under fairness constraints. This idea, though natural and intuitive, requires some extensions to Blackwell’s approachability theory, like ignoring the target set and having to estimate it.