Abstract
The ability of forecasting future human motion is important for human-machine interaction systems to understand human behaviors and make interaction. In this work, we focus on developing models to predict future human motion from past observed video frames. Motivated by the observation that human motion is closely related to the action being performed, we propose to explore action context to guide motion prediction. Specifically, we construct an action-specific memory bank to store representative motion dynamics for each action category, and design a query-read process to retrieve some motion dynamics from the memory bank.
The retrieved dynamics are consistent with the action depicted in the observed video frames and serve as a strong prior knowledge to guide motion prediction. We further formulate an action constraint loss to ensure the global semantic consistency of the predicted motion. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach, and we achieve state-of-the-art performance on 3D human motion prediction. 1

Introduction
Imagining and predicting the future motion of a person doing some actions (e.g., walking, standing up) is a natural ability of human beings. However, it is still very challenging for machines to achieve reasonable forecasting. In this work, we focus on 3D human motion prediction task which aims to forecast the future state of the 3D human body conditioned on several observed past video frames. Future motion prediction is important for many real-world applications like human-machine interaction and autonomous driving. The main challenge is that the future motion can vary greatly (i.e., the prediction space is large), which would increase the uncertainty and ambiguity of future motion prediction.
We observe that there exists a strong correlation between human motion and action category, which could be exploited to reduce such uncertainty and ambiguity. As illustrated in Figure 1, human action always contains some representative sub-processes such as swinging arm, throwing something out, etc. We name these sub-processes as motion dynamics. By exactly examining the videos in Figure 1, we further find that the motion dynamics could be shared across different subjects performing the same action. Motivated by the above observations, we propose to exploit representative motion dynamics for each action class to guide motion prediction and reduce the learning difficulty.
∗This work was partially done when Jiangxin Sun was an intern at Huya Inc.
†Jian-Fang Hu is the corresponding author. Hu is also with Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of
Information Security Technology, Guangzhou, China and Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced
Computing, Ministry of Education, China. 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
Figure 1: Illustration of representative motion dynamics. This figure shows that the motion dynamics could be shared across different subjects who are performing the same action.
Specifically, we propose a novel framework to perform future 3D motion prediction. In this framework, we construct an action-specific memory bank to store the representative motion dynamics for each action class. The constructed memory bank stores both short-term and long-term motion dynamics to capture motions with different velocities. And based on the memory bank, we further design a query-read process to query past observed motion and read candidate future motion dynamics from the memory bank. The motion dynamics read from the memory bank are used to explicitly guide future motion prediction. To ensure global motion consistency, we further formulate an action constraint loss to keep the semantic consistency between the predicted motion and the observed past motion. The proposed approach achieves promising prediction results and outperforms previous methods by a considerable margin, which demonstrates the effectiveness of using action-specific motion dynamics to guide motion prediction.
Overall, our main contributions are: 1) we construct an action-specific memory bank to exploit the action-specific representative motion dynamics; 2) we propose a novel framework that can effectively utilize the action-specific dynamics stored in the memory bank for guiding motion prediction; 3) our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance on 3D human motion prediction. 2