Abstract
We consider a nonlinear inverse problem y = f (Ax), where observations y ∈ Rm are the componentwise nonlinear transformation of Ax ∈ Rm, x ∈ Rn is the signal of interest and A is a known linear mapping. By properly specifying the nonlinear processing function, this model can be particularized to many signal processing problems, including compressed sensing and phase retrieval.
Our main goal in this paper is to understand the impact of sensing matrices, or more speciﬁcally the spectrum of sensing matrices, on the difﬁculty of recovering x from y. Towards this goal, we study the performance of one of the most successful recovery methods, i.e. the expectation propagation algorithm (EP). We deﬁne a notion for the spikiness of the spectrum of A and show the importance of this measure in the performance of the EP. Whether the spikiness of the spectrum can hurt or help the recovery performance of EP depends on f . We deﬁne certain quantities based on the function f that enables us to describe the impact of the spikiness of the spectrum on EP recovery. Based on our framework, we are able to show that for instance, in phase-retrieval problems, matrices with spikier spectrums are better for EP, while in 1-bit compressed sensing problems, less spiky (ﬂatter) spectrums offer better recoveries. Our results unify and substantially generalize the existing results that compare sub-Gaussian and orthogonal matrices, and provide a platform toward designing optimal sensing systems. 1

Introduction 1.1 Problem statement and contributions
Consider the problem of estimating a signal x ∈ Rn from the nonlinear measurements: y = f (cid:0)Ax(cid:1), (1) where A ∈ Rm×n is a measurement (or sensing) matrix and f : R (cid:55)→ Y is a function accounting for possible nonlinear effect of the measuring process. Here, the function f (·) is applied to Ax in a component-wise manner. The above model arises in many applications of signal processing
[13, 10, 41], communications [56, 9, 25], and machine learning [48, 40]. For instance, the phase retrieval problem, which is a special case of (1) with f (z) = |z|, has received signiﬁcant interest in recent years [13, 12, 15, 54, 60, 24, 26, 4, 46, 32, 5]. In this paper, we assume that the signal is generic and prior information such as sparsity is not explored. 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
The main goal of our work is to understand the impact of the sensing matrix, or more speciﬁcally the spectrum of the sensing matrix, on the difﬁculty of recovering the signal x from its measurements y. In many applications, one has certain level of freedom in designing the sensing matrix (e.g., transmitter design in communications or the masks used in phase retrieval application) and hence understanding the impact of the sensing matrix on the recovery algorithms is the ﬁrst step toward the optimal design of such systems. Rather than studying the information theoretic limits, where the computational complexity of the recovery algorithm is ignored, we would like to study the impact of the spectrum of the sensing matrix on efﬁcient algorithms that are used in applications. For this reason, we consider one of the most successful recovery algorithms that has received substantial attention in the last few years, i.e. expectation propagation (EP) [36, 38] (referred to as GLM-EP in this paper1), and study the impact of the spectrum of the sensing matrix on the performance of this algorithm. The EP algorithm studied here is an instance of the algorithm introduced in [22, 28] and is closely related to the orthogonal AMP (OAMP) [30] and vector AMP (VAMP) [42] algorithms (in that all these algorithms use divergence-free denoising functions [30]).
Similar to the approximate message passing (AMP) algorithm [17], GLM-EP has two distinguishing features: (i) Its asymptotic performance could be characterized exactly by a simple dynamical system (with very few states) called the state evolution (SE). (ii) It is conjectured that AMP or GLM-EP achieve the optimal performance among polynomial time algorithms [2, 14]. Based on the SE framework, we investigate the impact of the spectrum of the sensing matrix A on the performance of
GLM-EP. It turns out that the “spikiness” (or conversely “ﬂatness”) of the spectrum of the sensing matrix spectrum has a major impact on the performance of GLM-EP. To formalize this statement, we ﬁrst deﬁne a measure of “spikiness” of the spectrum based on Lorenz partial order [1]. We show that whether the spikiness of the spectrum beneﬁts or hurts GLM-EP depends on the choice of the nonlinear mapping f (as well as the sampling ratio). For instance, spikier spectrums help the performance of phase retrieval problem (where f (x) = |x|) but hurt the performance of 1-bit compressed sensing (where f (x) = sign(x)). We will characterize the classes of functions on which spikiness hurts or helps GLM-EP based on the monotonicity of a function (which is related to the scalar minimum mean square error) that will be deﬁned in this paper. As a byproduct of our studies, we will also show that when the spectrum is spiky enough, the number of measurements required by
GLM-EP to achieve perfect recovery approaches the information theoretical lower bound. 1.2