Abstract
Many industrial and security applications employ a suite of sensors for detecting abrupt changes in temporal behavior patterns. These abrupt changes typically manifest locally, rendering only a small subset of sensors informative. Continuous monitoring of every sensor can be expensive due to resource constraints, and serves as a motivation for the bandit quickest changepoint detection problem, where sensing actions (or sensors) are sequentially chosen, and only measurements corresponding to chosen actions are observed. We derive an information-theoretic lower bound on the detection delay for a general class of ﬁnitely parameterized probability distributions. We then propose a computationally efﬁcient online sensing scheme, which seamlessly balances the need for exploration of different sensing options with exploitation of querying informative actions. We derive expected delay bounds for the proposed scheme and show that these bounds match our information-theoretic lower bounds at low false alarm rates, establishing optimality of the proposed method. We then perform a number of experiments on synthetic and real datasets demonstrating the effectiveness of our proposed method. 1

Introduction
We propose a framework for bandit1 quickest change detection (BQCD). Speciﬁcally, we are given a multi-dimensional online data stream, which can be sequentially probed by means of actions belonging to an action set (for instance, only a few among all of the data stream components can be observed at any time, or a linear combination can be acquired). The online data stream can exhibit abrupt statistical changes, at any time, and only among a few arbitrary components. Our task is to sequentially probe the data stream by adaptively choosing valid actions based on past bandit2 observations associated with past actions. Our objective is to detect a change, if it has happened, with minimum detection delay.
Example Scenarios. Surveillance systems [HC11] are equipped with a suite of sensors that can be switched and steered to focus attention on any target or location over a physical landscape (see
Fig. 1) to detect abrupt changes at any location. On the other hand, sensor suites are resource limited, and only a limited subset, among all the locations, can be probed at any time. As such, 1By ‘bandit’ we generally mean adaptive sampling with partial information. 2This is different from classical quickest change detection [TNB14], where all of the multiple streams are observed at each time, and the only adaptive decision is to declare whether or not a change has happened. 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
we face a fundamental dilemma: Focusing attention at any one location can compromise change detection at other locations. Although we describe a scenario in surveillance, the problem of BQCD is general and arises in intrusion detection [Bas99], social networks [Vis+14], disease outbreaks and epidemics [QSC14; YSK15], manufacturing processes [Pur+19a; Din+06], energy limited sensor networks[OGR10; ES10], and vital health monitoring [Vil+17].
In this paper, we derive a fundamental characterization for the delay performance of BQCD, and make explicit, the fundamental tradeoff between delay and false-alarm in the low-false alarm regime.
We speciﬁcally make the following contributions.
Information-theoretic Lower Bound. We prove a lower bound on the expected detection delay that any BQCD algorithm must suffer at a ﬁxed false alarm rate. The lower bound exhibits a fundamental tradeoff between early stopping (false-alarm) and detection delay (time to detect abrupt change). It offers the key insight that the quickest way to detect a change, at any false-alarm rate, is by playing the ‘most informative action’, of an ‘oracle’ who a priori knows the post-change distribution. This suggests that to quickly identify changepoints, we must direct our effort towards rapidly identifying informative actions. On a technical level, we develop a change-of-measure argument for nonstationary, adaptive change detection, that allows for relating the divergences between random trajectories until stopping to the divergence of probability laws under each action for any two problem instances. (cid:15)-Greedy Change Detector ((cid:15)-GCD). We pro-pose (cid:15)-GCD, which, at a high level, uses a small amount of forced exploration to identify infor-mative actions. The forced exploration allows for rapid convergence towards informative ac-tions, and playing these actions minimizes de-tection delay. Our (cid:15)-GCD is based on the gen-eralized max-likelihood/likelihood ratio prin-ciple which is utilized to estimate parametric changes. To prove detection delay bounds we draw upon key insights of (cid:15)-GCD. We ﬁrst inter-pret the scheme in terms of competing parallel
‘queues’, where each queue corresponds to a can-didate post-change parameter, collects ‘arrivals’ which are log-likelihood ratios of observations, and cannot go negative. The true parameter is the queue which enjoys the highest growth rate after a change, and the detection delay is the time required for it to dominate and become the
‘longest queue’. The dynamics of the queues can be related to nonstationary random walks with drifts. Using these insights, we prove that the expected detection delay of (cid:15)-GCD at low false alarm rates mirrors our information theo-retic lower bounds thus establishing optimality of our method.
Experiments. We perform numerical experi-ments of (cid:15)-GCD on synthetic and real datasets and show that under variations of changepoints, anomalies, and action sets, we realize gains due to adaptive sensing. 2