Abstract
Motivated by neuroscientiﬁc and clinical applications, we empirically examine whether observational measures of information ﬂow can suggest interventions. We do so by performing experiments on artiﬁcial neural networks in the context of fairness in machine learning, where the goal is to induce fairness in the system through interventions. Using our recently developed M -information ﬂow frame-work, we measure the ﬂow of information about the true label (responsible for accuracy, and hence desirable), and separately, the ﬂow of information about a protected attribute (responsible for bias, and hence undesirable) on the edges of a trained neural network. We then compare the ﬂow magnitudes against the effect of intervening on those edges by pruning. We show that pruning edges that carry larger information ﬂows about the protected attribute reduces bias at the output to a greater extent. This demonstrates that M -information ﬂow can meaningfully suggest targets for interventions, answering the title’s question in the afﬁrmative.
We also evaluate bias-accuracy tradeoffs for different intervention strategies, to analyze how one might use estimates of desirable and undesirable information
ﬂows (here, accuracy and bias ﬂows) to inform interventions that preserve the former while reducing the latter. 1

Introduction
The “reward circuit” of the brain controls much of our behavior [1, 2]. It is believed that addiction is characterized by a strong bias towards immediate rewards in the reward circuit [3], while a different bias, called affective bias, in the same circuit, can lead to depression [4]. Broadly, such biases in the output of the reward circuit control our behavior and responses to stimuli. Recent technological advancements in neural probes and optogenetics [e.g., see 5, 6] are increasingly enabling us to record neural circuits at a high resolution and alter the network by activating or suppressing nodes and links, giving us powerful tools to understand and affect how this circuit processes information. Even a weak understanding of the reward circuit is motivating clinical interventions for individuals suffering from depression, addiction, obsessive compulsive disorder, obesity, etc.; patients are starting to receive surgeries for long-term deep-brain electrode implantation in brain regions that are involved in the reward circuit [7–10]. We identify a new and largely unexplored problem within this context: how do we perform minimal interventions that “correct” undesirable biases without affecting other functions of this important network as much as possible?
In this paper, we propose to use the M -information ﬂow framework, a recent advancement of ours, that enables tracking the information ﬂow about speciﬁc messages within a computational
*This work was done while P. Venkatesh and S. Dutta were Ph.D. students at Carnegie Mellon University.
†S. Dutta and N. Mehta contributed equally to this work. 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
circuit [11]. We aim to use this framework to identify interventions that can correct undesirable biases within the circuit, while preserving desirable ones. A difﬁculty that we face, however, is
ﬁnding a sufﬁciently comprehensive dataset with simultaneous recordings of the various brain regions involved in the reward circuit. Although advances in experimental techniques suggest that we are on track to have such datasets in the coming years [12, 13], simultaneous multi-area recordings of speciﬁc circuits are still rare. To overcome this issue, we use the context of fairness in artiﬁcial intelligence [14, 15] to study the above question, which, as we next discuss, provides an excellent analogy to the neuroscientiﬁc context.
The problem of reducing biases to improve fairness in a decision-making system is much like that of reducing undesirable biases in the reward circuit: (i) both systems rely on learned associations from stimuli and responses/labels (i.e., training data); (ii) both systems have an intended objective (to learn a desired association between the features and the true labels, or healthy reward-based learning); and (iii) both systems often learn undesirable associations (e.g., racial or gender bias in artiﬁcial neural networks, and biases that cause addiction, depression, or obsessive compulsive disorder in the reward circuit). This suggests that if we want to understand how information ﬂows can inform interventions to correct biases in the reward network, we can simulate such experiments by examining the relationship between information ﬂows and interventions in artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs) trained on biased datasets.
A distinct advantage offered by our M -information ﬂow framework [11] is that it can track the ﬂows of multiple messages in a neural circuit. In this paper, we adapt our information ﬂow measure to
ANNs, and evaluate this measure in an empirical setting involving multiple messages (one each pertaining to bias and accuracy) for the ﬁrst time. We then perform interventions using different strategies to prune nodes or edges of the ANN, and measure the effect of each intervention by quantifying the change in accuracy or bias at the output of the network.
Goals and Contributions. Concretely, the main goals and contributions of this paper are: 1. Our primary goal is to study whether measuring information ﬂows about a message can suggest targets for interventions in an ANN, to change how its output is affected by that message.
Towards this, our ﬁrst contribution is in adapting M -information ﬂow to the ANN context, developing a meaningful way to quantify it. 2. Secondly, we wish to understand the correlation between the magnitude of information ﬂow on an edge and the degree to which an intervention on that edge affects the output. For this, our contribution is an empirical examination of information ﬂows in an ANN, showing that they can predict the effect of interventions in a fairness context. 3. Lastly, we wish to understand how we can use information ﬂows corresponding to two different messages, to remove undesirable behaviors while preserving desirable ones. Towards this, we compare different intervention strategies that are informed by information ﬂows, and compare the bias-accuracy tradeoffs achieved by each of these strategies.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: we discuss related work below, following which we summarize the fundamentals of the M -information ﬂow framework in Section 2. We also show how
M -information ﬂow can be adapted to ANNs, discuss the setup of the fairness context, and explain the rationale for adopting an empirical approach. In Section 3, we describe how we empirically evaluate our goals: speciﬁcally, we discuss the process of estimating M -information ﬂow and the design of different intervention strategies. Finally, we present our results on synthetic and real datasets in Section 4, and conclude with a discussion of the implications of our results in Section 5.