Abstract
Communication is compositional if complex signals can be represented as a combi-nation of simpler subparts. In this paper, we theoretically show that inductive biases on both the training framework and the data are needed to develop a compositional communication. Moreover, we prove that compositionality spontaneously arises in the signaling games, where agents communicate over a noisy channel. We experi-mentally conﬁrm that a range of noise levels, which depends on the model and the data, indeed promotes compositionality. Finally, we provide a comprehensive study of this dependence and report results in terms of recently studied compositionality metrics: topographical similarity, conﬂict count, and context independence. 1

Introduction
In emergent communication studies, one often considers agents who can share information about a set of objects described by the common features. Such a situation is common in multi-agent systems with partial observation (Foerster et al. (2016), Lazaridou et al. (2016), Jaques et al. (2018),
Raczaszek-Leonardi et al. (2018)) and it is the major theme in signaling games (Fudenberg et al. (1991), Lewis (1969), Skyrms (2010), Lazaridou et al. (2018)). In a signaling game, one agent (a sender) conveys information about an object to another agent (a receiver), which then has to infer the object’s features. Typically, agents are rewarded if some of the features are correctly identiﬁed.
During this process, the agents develop a communication protocol. A recent line of work has studied conditions under which compositionality emerges (Batali (1998); Kottur et al. (2017); Choi et al. (2018); Korbak et al. (2019); Li and Bowling (2019); Słowik et al. (2020b,a); Guo et al. (2020)).
Compositionality is a crucial feature of natural languages and it has been investigated extensively in cognitive science (see e.g. Chomsky (1957) Fodor and Pylyshyn (1988)). It is often measured using dedicated metrics such as topographic similarity (Brighton and Kirby (2006); Lazaridou et al. (2018); Kriegeskorte (2008); Bouchacourt and Baroni (2018)), context independence Bogin et al. (2018), conﬂict count Kuci´nski et al. (2020), or positional disentanglement (Chaabouni et al. (2020)).
In signaling games it bears a strong resemblance to the concept of disentangled representations, see (Higgins et al. (2017), Kim and Mnih (2018), Locatello et al. (2019)). In machine learning context,
∗Corresponding author.
†Now at Google. 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
compositionality is perceived as a generalization mechanism (Lake et al. (2016)) and has been used e.g. for goal composition (Jiang et al. (2019)) or knowledge transfer (Li and Bowling (2019)).
In this paper, we theoretically show that inductive biases on both the training framework and the data are needed for compositionality to emerge. A similar observation has been made by Kottur et al. (2017); however, our result is more fundamental and points out a common misconception that compositionality can be learned in a purely unsupervised way. Such a result can be perceived as a discrete analog of Locatello et al. (2019), applicable in the communication context.
We then prove that adding an inductive bias in the loss function coupled with communication over a noisy channel leads to the spontaneous emergence of compositionality. This shows the catalytic role of noise in this process. Intuitively, this can be attributed to the (partial) robustness of compositional language with respect to message corruption caused by a noisy channel.
We experimentally verify that a certain range of noise levels, dependent on the model and the data, promotes compositionality. We provide a wide range of experiments that illustrate the inﬂuence of different priors. For the inductive biases in the training framework, we look into the impact of the network architecture as well as implementation and temporal variation in noise. On the data side, we study the effect of scrambling visual input or its description. We also study the generalization properties of the proposed training framework. 2