Abstract
Causal inference and discovery from observational data has been extensively stud-ied across multiple ﬁelds. However, most prior work has focused on independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) data. In this paper, we propose a formalization for causal inference between pairs of event variables in multivariate recurrent event streams by extending Rubin’s framework for the average treatment effect (ATE) and propensity scores to multivariate point processes. Analogous to a joint probability distribution representing i.i.d. data, a multivariate point process repre-sents data involving asynchronous and irregularly spaced occurrences of various types of events over a common timeline. We theoretically justify our point process causal framework and show how to obtain unbiased estimates of the proposed measure. We conduct an experimental investigation using synthetic and real-world event datasets, where our proposed causal inference framework is shown to exhibit superior performance against a set of baseline pairwise causal association scores. 1

Introduction
It is widely known that the gold standard for effective causal inference is through the use of inter-ventional data such as randomized controlled trials, for measuring the impact of some treatment on an outcome of interest [30]. However, intervening in the system can often be impractical or even impossible, in which case one must conduct causal analysis using observational data alone.
Observational data in the form of multivariate event streams is common in many domains including health, ﬁnance, and retail. Analogous to how an observation in an i.i.d dataset can be viewed as a sample from a joint distribution over a set of random variables, a multivariate event stream can be viewed as a sample from a multivariate point process over a set of event labels [10], where the instantaneous rate of any event label depends on the historical occurrences of some subset of the event labels. Modeling, ﬁtting, and predicting future occurrences given a multivariate event stream is an active area in statistics [9, 11, 40], data mining [28, 34], and machine learning [32, 16, 29, 44, 7].
Recent work in this area leverages advances in deep learning [45, 25, 17, 48, 21].