Abstract
Scene text detection remains a grand challenge due to the variation in text curva-tures, orientations, and aspect ratios. One of the hardest problems in this task is how to represent text instances of arbitrary shapes. Although many methods have been proposed to model irregular texts in a ﬂexible manner, most of them lose simplicity and robustness. Their complicated post-processings and the regression under Dirac delta distribution undermine the detection performance and the generalization ability. In this paper, we propose an efﬁcient text instance representation named
CentripetalText (CT), which decomposes text instances into the combination of text kernels and centripetal shifts. Speciﬁcally, we utilize the centripetal shifts to implement pixel aggregation, guiding the external text pixels to the internal text kernels. The relaxation operation is integrated into the dense regression for cen-tripetal shifts, allowing the correct prediction in a range instead of a speciﬁc value.
The convenient reconstruction of text contours and the tolerance of prediction errors in our method guarantee the high detection accuracy and the fast inference speed, respectively. Besides, we shrink our text detector into a proposal generation module, namely CentripetalText Proposal Network (CPN), replacing Segmentation
Proposal Network (SPN) in Mask TextSpotter v3 and producing more accurate proposals. To validate the effectiveness of our method, we conduct experiments on several commonly used scene text benchmarks, including both curved and multi-oriented text datasets. For the task of scene text detection, our approach achieves superior or competitive performance compared to other existing methods, e.g., F-measure of 86.3% at 40.0 FPS on Total-Text, F-measure of 86.1% at 34.8
FPS on MSRA-TD500, etc. For the task of end-to-end scene text recognition, our method outperforms Mask TextSpotter v3 by 1.1% in F-measure on Total-Text. 1

Introduction
In the past decade, scene text detection has attracted increasing interests in the computer vision community, as localizing the region of each text instance in natural images with high accuracy is an essential prerequisite for many practical applications such as blind navigation, scene understanding, and text retrieval. With the rapid development of object detection [29, 19, 7, 18] and segmentation [22, 46, 26, 50], many promising methods [51, 23, 37, 16, 38, 39] have been proposed to solve the problem. However, scene text detection is still a challenging task due to the variety of text curvatures, orientations, and aspect ratios.
How to represent text instances in real imagery is one of the major challenges for scene text detection, and usually there are two strategies to solve the problem arising from this challenge. The ﬁrst is to treat text instances as a speciﬁc kind of object and use rotated rectangles or quadrangles for
⇤Corresponding author 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
description. This kind of methods are typically inherited from generic object detection and often utilize manually designed anchors for better regression. Obviously, this solution ignores the geometric traits of irregular texts, which may introduce considerable background noises, and furthermore, it is difﬁcult to formulate appropriate anchors to ﬁt the texts of various shapes. The other strategy is to decompose text instances into several conceptual or physical components, and reconstruct the polygonal contours through a series of indispensable post-processing steps. For example, PAN [38] follows the idea of clustering and aggregates text pixels according to the distances between their embeddings. In TextSnake [23], text instances are represented by text center lines and ordered disks. Consequently, these methods are more ﬂexible and more general than the previous ones in modeling. Nevertheless, most of them suffer from slow inference speed, due to complicated post-processing steps, essentially caused by this kind of tedious multi-component-based representation strategy. For another, their component prediction is modeled as a simple Dirac delta distribution, which strictly requires numerical outputs to reach the exact positions and thus weakens the ability to tolerate mistakes. The wrong component prediction will propagate errors to heuristic post-processing procedures, making the rebuilt text contours inaccurate. Based on the above observations, we can ﬁnd out that the implementation of a fast and accurate scene text detector heavily depends on a simple but effective text instance representation with a robust post-processing algorithm, which can tolerate ambiguity and uncertainty.
) ( 80 82 85 86 83 50 25 75 81 84
%
CT-512
CT-320
CT-640
PAN-640
PAN-512
PAN-320 100
CT (ours)
DB (2020)
DB-ResNet50
PAN (2019)
DB-ResNet18  e r u s a e m
-F (CT)
Speed (FPS)
To overcome these problems, we propose an ef-ﬁcient component-based representation method named CentripetalText for arbitrary-shaped texts. Enabled by the proposed CT, our scene text detector outperforms other state-of-the-art approaches and achieves the best trade-off between accuracy and speed (as shown in
Fig. 1). Speciﬁcally, as illustrated in Fig. 4, our method consists of two steps: i) input im-ages are fed to the convolutional neural network to predict the probability maps and centripetal shift maps. ii) pixels are grouped to form the text instances through the heuristics based on text kernels and centripetal shifts. In details, the text kernels are generated from the probabil-ity map followed by binarization and connected component search, and the centripetal shifts are predicted at each position of the centripetal shift map. Then each pixel is shifted by the amount of its centripetal shift from its original position in the centripetal shift map to the text kernel pixel or background pixel in the probability map. All pixels that can be shifted into the region of the same text kernel form a text instance. In this manner, we can reconstruct the ﬁnal text instances fast and easily through marginal matrix operations and several calls to functions of the OpenCV library. Moreover, we develop an enhanced regression loss, namely the Relaxed L1 Loss, mainly for dense centripetal shift regression, which further improves the detection precision. Beneﬁting from the new loss, our method is robust to the prediction errors of centripetal shifts because the centripetal shifts which can guide pixels to the region of the right text kernel are all regarded as positive. Besides, CT can be fused with CNN-based text detectors or spotters in a plug-and-play manner. We replace SPN in Mask TextSpotter v3 [13] with our CentripetalText
Proposal Network (CPN), a proposal generation module based on CT, which produces more accurate proposals and improves the end-to-end text recognition performance further.
Figure 1: Performance and speed of some top-performing real-time scene text detectors on the
Total-Text dataset. Enabled by the proposed CT, an efﬁcient representation of text instances, our method outperforms DB [16] and PAN [38], and achieves the best trade-off between accuracy and speed. More results are shown in Tab. 3.
To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed CT and Relaxed L1 Loss, we adopt the design of network architecture in PAN [38] and train a powerful end-to-end scene text detector by replacing its text instance representation and loss function with ours. We conduct extensive experiments on the commonly used scene text benchmarks including Total-Text [2], CTW1500 [47], and MSRA-TD500 [45], demonstrating that our method achieves superior or competitive performance compared to the state of the art, e.g., F-measure of 86.3% at 40.0 FPS on Total-Text, F-measure of 86.1% at 34.8 FPS on MSRA-TD500, etc. For the task of end-to-end text recognition, equipped with CPN, the 2
F-measure value of Mask TextSpotter v3 can further be boosted to 71.9% and 79.5% without and with lexicon, respectively.
Major contributions of our work can be summarized as follows:
•
•
•
We propose a novel and efﬁcient text instance representation method named CentripetalText, in which text instances are decomposed into the combination of text kernels and centripetal shifts. The attached post-processing algorithm is also simple and robust, making the generation of text contours fast and accurate.
To reduce the burden of model training, we develop an enhanced loss function, namely the
Relaxed L1 Loss, mainly for dense centripetal shift regression, which further improves the detection performance.
Equipped with the proposed CT and the Relaxed L1 Loss, our scene text detector achieves superior or competitive results compared to other existing approaches on the curved or oriented text benchmarks, and our end-to-end scene text recognizer surpasses the current state of the art. 2