Abstract
The objective of change point detection (CPD) is to detect significant and abrupt changes in the dynamics of the underlying system of interest through multivariate time series observations. In this work, we develop and analyze an algorithm for CPD that is inspired by a variant of the classical singular spectrum analysis (SSA) approach for time series by combining it with the classical cumulative sum (CUSUM) statistic from sequential hy-pothesis testing. In particular, we model the underlying dynamics of multivariate time se-ries observations through the spatio-temporal model introduced recently in the multivari-ate SSA (mSSA) literature. The change point in such a setting corresponds to a change in the underlying spatio-temporal model. As the primary contributions of this work, we de-velop an algorithm based on CUSUM-statistic to detect such change points in an online fashion. We extend the analysis of CUSUM statistics, traditionally done for the setting of independent observations, to the dependent setting of (multivariate) time series under the spatio-temporal model. Specifically, for a given parameter h>0, our method achieves the following desirable trade-off: when a change happens, it detects it within O(h) time delay on average, while in the absence of change, it does not declare false detection for at least exp(⌦(h)) time length on average. We conduct empirical experiments using benchmark and synthetic datasets. We find that the proposed method performs competi-tively or outperforms the state-of-the-art change point detection methods across datasets. 1

Introduction
The task of change point detection (CPD) is concerned with detecting significant changes in the temporal evolution of a system from noisy observations. This task has attracted considerable attention in the statistics and machine learning communities as it has a broad range of applications including quality control [5], climate research [35], and speech recognition [36]. This interest resulted in many methods and algorithms-we refer to [3] for a thorough review.
Despite the relatively simple setup of the CPD problem, different variations of the problem have been studied and analyzed. We contrast two general settings characterized by the assumptions on the data generating process.The first is the classical view that aims to detect distribution changes from independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) observations, cf. [34] and more recently [7, 23]. The second deals with the more intricate time series dynamics by assuming the data to be dependent and following a specific temporal structure. Therein, the aim is to detect changes in this temporal structure of the observations. Some of the time series models considered include auto-regressive models [4, 46] and state-space models [20].
An important model comes from the singular spectrum analysis (SSA) literature, where the data is assumed to follow an underlying function associated with a low-dimensional subspace. This time series model has inspired algorithms for different inference tasks in time series, including imputation, forecasting, and
CPD [13]. The key idea behind using SSA for CPD is that the subspace spanned by the columns of the 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
Hankel matrix constructed from an initial subsequence of the time series is approximately equivalent to the one spanned by the later subsequences of the time series. The theoretical analysis of this algorithm focused primarily on the probability of error in the asymptotic setting where the signal and noise are assumed to be separable. However, previous work on SSA for CPD does not provide finite-sample analysis on any metric on interest in CPD. Further, its extension to the case of multivariate time series (multiple SSA or mSSA) lacks theoretical understanding, despite being empirically effective [11]. In this work, we consider a variant of mSSA proposed and analyzed in [1] for the tasks of imputation and forecasting. We extend the use of this mSSA variant to devise an algorithm for CPD.
Another important distinction between CPD methods lies in whether the method is online versus offline.
In the offline setting, the dataset is fixed and the detection is made retrospectively based on the knowledge of the entire dataset. In such settings, only the accuracy of the detection is of concern. In contrast, in the online setting, the data arrives sequentially and a decision must be made as quickly as possible. In addition to the detection accuracy, the delay in making the detection (i.e. the number of data points observed after the change until it is detected) is another important metric in the online setting.
A common overarching framework for the online CPD problem extends from sequential hypothesis testing, where the problem is formulated as a binary hypothesis test that is applied sequentially as new data comes in [40]. This framework provides a way to evaluate the performance of online CPD methods in terms of the trade-off between false alarm rate and detection delay. The classical setting of this framework uses parametric models and forms likelihood ratio-based test statistics. In more recent work, this framework has been utilized with different test statistics. For example, tests using statistics based on the kernel Fisher discriminant ratio [16], maximum mean discrepancy [25], and subspace distance [19] were proposed.
However, rigorously characterizing the trade-off between false alarm rate and detection delay for time series is absent in the literature.
In this work, we are motivated to fill the gap in literature by providing an online method for CPD for the setting of multivariate time series data (not i.i.d.) to detect change points with provable performance guarantees and desirable empirical performance.
Summary of contributions. Below, we summarize the main contributions of this work. 1. We introduce an expressive spatio-temporal model as described in Section 2.1 to model the dynamics and posit the question of detection as a change in these dynamics. 2. We develop a variant of the SSA algorithm for online change point detection in multivariate time series.
In particular, we propose an algorithm that utilizes the low-dimensional structure of the time series to construct a cumulative sum (CUSUM) statistic (a la [34]) based on subspace distance. We refer to Section 3 for a full description of the proposed algorithm. 3. We analyze the performance of this algorithm in terms of the average running length (ARL), a common metric used in CUSUM tests to measure both the delay in detection and the average running time until a false alarm. Our main result shows that in the case of no change, the expected running length is exponential in the selected threshold (Theorem 4.1). While in the presence of change, the expected detection delay is linear in the threshold (Theorem 4.2). The results are consistent with the behavior of the CUSUM tests in the i.i.d. case. 4. We conduct comparative empirical experiments against state-of-the-art change point detection methods using benchmark datasets. In Table 1, we provide a summary that suggests that our method is at least as good, if not better than, state-of-art methods (SOTA) across datasets.