Abstract
Semi-supervised learning aims to leverage a large amount of unlabeled data for performance boosting. Existing works primarily focus on image classiﬁcation.
In this paper, we delve into semi-supervised learning for object detection, where labeled data are more labor-intensive to collect. Current methods are easily dis-tracted by noisy regions generated by pseudo labels. To combat the noisy labeling, we propose noise-resistant semi-supervised learning by quantifying the region uncertainty. We ﬁrst investigate the adverse effects brought by different forms of noise associated with pseudo labels. Then we propose to quantify the uncertainty of regions by identifying the noise-resistant properties of regions over different strengths. By importing the region uncertainty quantiﬁcation and promoting multi-peak probability distribution output, we introduce uncertainty into training and further achieve noise-resistant learning. Experiments on both PASCAL VOC and
MS COCO demonstrate the extraordinary performance of our method. 1

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have developed signiﬁcantly in the computer vision area [15, 18].
Despite this, DNNs highly rely on the fully-supervised learning with a large amount of human-annotated data, which consumes a tremendous amount of time to annotate. In comparison, unlabeled images are much easier to access. Semi-supervised learning [4] is thus studied to address this problem.
By involving large-scale unlabeled images in training, semi-supervised learning becomes more valued
[16, 26, 40, 28] on benchmark datasets.
However, most of the existing semi-supervised learning methods focus on image classiﬁcation. Object detection, where complete annotations include category-aware tags and location-aware bounding boxes, requires much more efforts to construct large-scale fully-annotated datasets. In this work, we aim at semi-supervised learning for object detection [35]: an object detector is trained on a dataset where only a small fraction of images are fully-labeled and the rest of them are unlabeled. In this setting, easily obtained unlabeled data are utilized to improve the performance of fully-supervised object detection. Most of the current semi-supervised learning methods in object detection are based on pseudo labeling [19, 36]. A fully-supervised model is ﬁrstly pre-trained on completely labeled images then performs inference on unlabeled data to generate pseudo labels. These unlabeled images associated with pseudo labels are further combined with labeled data to learn the semi-supervised model. This pseudo labeling scheme has been widely adopted in semi-supervised object detection
[31]. However, the performance is still limited since the noise inherently exists in pseudo labels, i.e., pseudo labeling based semi-supervised learning methods severely suffer from the inherent noise.
∗Corresponding author 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
Figure 1: The working framework of our proposed method. To combat noise associated with pseudo labels, we quantify uncertainty for different regions ﬁrst. By further constructing uncertainty-aware soft target and promoting multi-peak probability distribution, we introduce uncertainty into training and achieve noise-resistant learning.
To promote semi-supervised learning, it is natural to ask: what kinds of adverse effects are caused by the noisy pseudo labels in detection? A common way of object detection is to ﬁrstly generate several candidate region proposals then extract object-centric feature representations. Because of the noisy pseudo labels, region proposals are likely to be assigned with incorrect labels. Based on the error analysis, we discover that three kinds of errors (i.e., the missed GT error, the classiﬁcation error, and the assignment error) can be attributed to noisy pseudo labeling. Another question arises: how to combat noise inherent with pseudo labels and facilitate semi-supervised learning? To answer this, we estimate the noise by quantifying the uncertainty of noise-polluted region proposals. In particular, we measure the region uncertainty from the perspective of incorrect or imprecise predictions, then involve this uncertainty for noise-resistant semi-supervised learning.
In this paper, we propose a region uncertainty quantiﬁcation based semi-supervised learning method for object detection. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst present a detailed investigation into the effects of noisy pseudo labels. We observe that different types of region proposals behave with different sensitivity in the face of noisy labels. By associating the varied sensitivity with noisy pseudo labels, we present a quantitative metric to measure the uncertainty degrees of regions and construct an uncertainty-aware soft target as the learning objective. In addition, we remove the competitive effect among classes to allow multi-peak probabilistic conﬁdence and avoid over-conﬁdent predictions for uncertain regions.
By quantifying and embracing the region uncertainty, we obtain a novel semi-supervised learning approach for object detection with high noise resistance and superior performance.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We investigate the negative effects of noisy pseudo labels. A novel region uncertainty quantiﬁcation metric is proposed from the perspective of the sensitivity to noisy pseudo labeling.
• We propose a noise-resistant semi-supervised learning approach by formulating an uncertainty-aware soft target as the learning objective, which prevents the performance from deterioration caused by noisy pseudo labeling.
• By removing the competition among classes and allowing multi-peak probability distributions, we further alleviate the overﬁtting to noisy pseudo labels.
Our method achieves the state-of-the-art results on the PASCAL VOC and MS COCO dataset, exceeding supervised baseline methods by 6.2% and 4.2% respectively. 2