Abstract
Continual learning (CL) — the ability to continuously learn, building on previ-ously acquired knowledge — is a natural requirement for long-lived autonomous reinforcement learning (RL) agents. While building such agents, one needs to balance opposing desiderata, such as constraints on capacity and compute, the ability to not catastrophically forget, and to exhibit positive transfer on new tasks.
Understanding the right trade-off is conceptually and computationally challenging, which we argue has led the community to overly focus on catastrophic forgetting.
In response to these issues, we advocate for the need to prioritize forward transfer and propose Continual World, a benchmark consisting of realistic and meaningfully diverse robotic tasks built on top of Meta-World [54] as a testbed. Following an in-depth empirical evaluation of existing CL methods, we pinpoint their limitations and highlight unique algorithmic challenges in the RL setting. Our benchmark aims to provide a meaningful and computationally inexpensive challenge for the community and thus help better understand the performance of existing and future solutions. Information about the benchmark, including the open-source code, is available at https://sites.google.com/view/continualworld. 1

Introduction
Change is ubiquitous. Unsurprisingly, due to evolutionary pressure, humans can quickly adapt and creatively reuse their previous experiences. In contrast, although biologically inspired, deep learning (DL) models excel mostly in static domains that satisfy the i.i.d. assumption, as for example in image processing [28, 49, 10, 40], language modelling [52, 11] or biological applications [47]. As the systems are scaled up and deployed in open-ended settings, such assumptions are increasingly questionable; imagine, for example, a robot that needs to adapt to the changing environment and the wear-and-tear of its hardware. Continual learning (CL), an area that explicitly focuses on such problems, has been gaining more attention recently. The progress in this area could offer enormous advantages for deep neural networks [19] and move the community closer to the long-term goal of building intelligent machines [20].
⇤equal contribution 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
Evaluation of CL methods is challenging. Due to the sequential nature of the problem that disallows parallel computation, evaluation tends to be expensive, which has biased the community to focus on toy tasks. These are mostly in the domain of supervised learning, often relying on MNIST. In this work, we expand on previous discussions on the topic [45, 16, 30, 46] and introduce a new benchmark, Continual World. The benchmark is built on realistic robotic manipulation tasks from
Meta-World [54], beneﬁting from its diversity but also being computationally cheap. Moreover, we provide shorter auxiliary sequences, all of which enable a quick research cycle. On the conceptual level, a fundamental difﬁculty of evaluating CL algorithms comes from the different desiderata for a CL solution. These objectives are often opposing each other, forcing practitioners to explicitly or implicitly make trade-offs in their algorithmic design that are data-dependent. Continual World provides more meaningful relationships between tasks, answering recent calls [19] to increase attention on forward transfer.
Additionally, we provide an extensive evaluation of a spectrum of commonly used CL methods. It highlights that many approaches can deal relatively well with catastrophic forgetting at the expense of other desiderata, in particular forward transfer. This emphasizes our call for focusing on forward transfer and the need for more benchmarks that allow for common structure among the tasks.
The main contribution of this work is a CL benchmark that poses optimizing forward transfer as the central goal and shows that existing methods struggle to outperform simple baselines in terms of the forward transfer capability. We release the code2 both for the benchmark and 7 CL methods, which aims to provide the community helpful tools to better understand the performance of existing and future solutions. We encourage to visit the website3 of the project and participate in the Continual
World Challenge. 2