Abstract
Secure multi-party computation (MPC) allows parties to perform computations on data while keeping that data private. This capability has great potential for machine-learning applications: it facilitates training of machine-learning models on private data sets owned by different parties, evaluation of one party’s private model using another party’s private data, etc. Although a range of studies imple-ment machine-learning models via secure MPC, such implementations are not yet mainstream. Adoption of secure MPC is hampered by the absence of ﬂexible software frameworks that “speak the language” of machine-learning researchers and engineers. To foster adoption of secure MPC in machine learning, we present
CRYPTEN: a software framework that exposes popular secure MPC primitives via abstractions that are common in modern machine-learning frameworks, such as tensor computations, automatic differentiation, and modular neural networks. This paper describes the design of CRYPTEN and measure its performance on state-of-the-art models for text classiﬁcation, speech recognition, and image classiﬁcation.
Our benchmarks show that CRYPTEN’s GPU support and high-performance com-munication between (an arbitrary number of) parties allows it to perform efﬁcient private evaluation of modern machine-learning models under a semi-honest threat model. For example, two parties using CRYPTEN can securely predict phonemes in speech recordings using Wav2Letter [17] faster than real-time. We hope that
CRYPTEN will spur adoption of secure MPC in the machine-learning community. 1

Introduction
Secure multi-party computation (MPC; [30, 69]) allows parties to collaboratively perform computa-tions on their combined data sets without revealing the data they possess to each other. This capability of secure MPC has the potential to unlock a variety of machine-learning applications that are currently infeasible because of data privacy concerns. For example, secure MPC can allow medical research institutions to jointly train better diagnostic models without having to share their sensitive patient data [27] or allow social scientists to analyze gender wage gap statistics without companies having to share sensitive salary data [42]. The prospect of such applications of machine learning with rigorous privacy and security guarantees has spurred a number of studies on machine learning via secure MPC [38, 41, 48, 58, 63, 66, 67]. However, at present, adoption of secure MPC in machine learning is still relatively limited considering its wide-ranging potential. One of the main obstacles to widespread adoption is that the complexity of secure MPC techniques puts them out of reach for most machine-learning researchers, who frequently lack in-depth knowledge of cryptographic techniques.
To foster the adoption of secure MPC techniques in machine learning, we present CRYPTEN: a
ﬂexible software framework that aims to make modern secure MPC techniques accessible to machine-learning researchers and developers without a background in cryptography. Speciﬁcally, CRYPTEN 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
provides a comprehensive tensor-computation library in which all computations are performed via secure MPC. CRYPTEN’s API closely follows the API of the popular PyTorch framework for machine learning [54, 55], which makes it easy to use for machine-learning practitioners. For example, it provides automatic differentiation and a modular neural-network package. CRYPTEN assumes an semi-honest threat model [30, §2.3.2] and works for an arbitrary number of parties. To make private training and inference efﬁcient, CRYPTEN off-loads computations to the GPU and uses high-performance communication libraries to implement interactions between parties.
The paper presents: (1) an overview of CRYPTEN’s design principles; (2) a description of the design of CRYPTEN and of the secure MPC protocols implemented; (3) a collection of benchmark experiments using CRYPTEN to run private versions of state-of-the-art models for text classiﬁcation, speech recognition, and image classiﬁcation; and (4) a discussion of open problems and a roadmap for the further development of CRYPTEN. Altogether, the paper demonstrates that CRYPTEN’s
ﬂexible, PyTorch-like API makes private inference and training of modern machine-learning models easy to implement and efﬁcient. For example, CRYPTEN allows two parties to privately classify an image [26, 35] in 2-3 seconds, or to securely make phoneme predictions for 16kHz speech recordings [17] faster than real-time. We hope that CRYPTEN’s promising performance and ease-of-use will foster the adoption of secure MPC by the machine-learning community, and pave the way for a new generation of secure and private machine-learning systems. 2