Abstract
Learning disentangled representations for user intentions from multi-feedback (i.e., positive and negative feedback) can enhance the accuracy and explainability of recommendation algorithms. However, learning such disentangled representations from multi-feedback data is challenging because i) multi-feedback is complex: there exist complex relations among different types of feedback (e.g., click, unclick, and dislike, etc) as well as various user intentions, and ii) multi-feedback is noisy: there exists noisy (useless) information both in features and labels, which may deteriorate the recommendation performance. Existing disentangled recommenda-tion works only focus on positive feedback, failing to handle the complex relations and noise hidden in multi-feedback data. To solve this problem, in this work we propose a Curriculum Disentangled Recommendation (CDR) model that is capa-ble of efﬁciently learning disentangled representations from complex and noisy multi-feedback for better recommendation. Concretely, we design a co-ﬁltering dynamic routing mechanism which simultaneously captures the complex relations among different behavioral feedback and user intentions as well as denoise the representations in the feature level. We then present an adjustable self-evaluating curriculum that is able to evaluate sample difﬁculties for better model training and conduct denoising in the label level via disregarding useless information. Our extensive experiments on several real-world datasets demonstrate that the proposed
CDR model can signiﬁcantly outperform several state-of-the-art methods in terms of recommendation accuracy3. 1

Introduction
Recommenders aim to capture the user’s preferences from different aspects of information for more accurate prediction[1–4] . Learning disentangled representations that can uncover and disentangle the latent explanatory factors hidden in user behavioral data has recently been shown as an effective way to discover users’ intentions, improving both recommendation accuracy and explainability [5–9].
Multi-feedback, normally including the positive feedback (e.g., click) and negative feedback (unclick and dislike, etc.), is of great signiﬁcance to depict the user’s unbiased and various intentions [10].
Learning disentangled representation from multi-feedback is able to capture various user intentions more accurately, leading to improvement of accuracy and explainability in recommendation.
However, learning such disentangled representation from multi-feedback that can best serve recom-mendation is quite challenging due to two reasons. i) Multi-feedback is complex: different types of
∗Equal contributions
†Corresponding Authors. 3Our code will be released at https://github.com/forchchch/CDR 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
feedback in multi-feedback data have complex relations with each other, and the relations between multi-feedback and various user intentions are also complicated. For instance, a user may unclick an item because of disinclination, getting tired of seeing the same type of item previously clicked too many times, as well as lacking enough time to view the item in detail. ii) Multi-feedback is noisy: the large amount of feedback such as unclick brings a lot of noisy information (useless for recommendation) that may severely deteriorate the recommendation accuracy. For example, a user may unclick an item because he truly dislikes this item or he has interests in the item but is interrupted by others before making the click decision. As such, completely incorporating the unclick feedback as historical features to extract user intention representations may run the risk of bringing feature-level noise, while directly regarding the unclick behavior as negative samples to train the model will probably introduce label-level noise. Existing works on disentangled representation learning merely rely on the positive user feedback to extract the user intentions, failing to handle the complex relations and noisy (useless) information hidden in multi-feedback data.
To tackle these challenges, we propose a Curriculum Disentangled Recommendation (CDR) model that is able to accurately discover various user intentions from different kinds of user feedback. The
CDR model consists of two core components, i.e., the co-ﬁltering dynamic routing mechanism and the adjustable self-evaluating curriculum strategy, which together learn disentangled representations as well as captures the complex relational dependencies and ﬁlters out noise from multi-feedback to achieve more accurate recommendation. More concretely, the proposed routing mechanism utilizes the dependencies among different feedback to accurately discover the user preferences, followed by the intention aggregation which further helps to learn disentangled representations for users. Our adjustable self-evaluating curriculum then guides the model towards better optima by reweighing samples according to the self-evaluated difﬁculty. The proposed curriculum can further enhance the model performance by making the model learn from multi-feedback data of different difﬁculties at different learning paces, thus preventing the model from overﬁtting the data with improper labels.
We conduct extensive experiments on several real-world datasets to demonstrate that our proposed
CDR model can signiﬁcantly beat baseline methods in terms of recommendation accuracy.
To summarize, our contributions are listed as follows. (1) We propose a Curriculum Disentangled
Recommendation (CDR) model to learn disentangled representations for recommendation from multi-feedback with complex relations and noisy information. (2) We propose a co-ﬁltering dynamic routing mechanism to simultaneously capture complex relations among different sorts of feedback and various user intentions as well as ﬁltering out feature-level noise in multi-feedback. (3) We propose an adjustable self-evaluating curriculum to guide the model towards better optima by alleviating the impact of label-level noise in a more controllable and convenient way. 2