Abstract
Typically, inversion algorithms assume that a forward model, which relates a source to its resulting measurements, is known and ﬁxed. Using collected indirect measurements and the forward model, the goal becomes to recover the source.
When the forward model is unknown, or imperfect, artifacts due to model mis-match occur in the recovery of the source. In this paper, we study the problem of blind inversion: solving an inverse problem with unknown or imperfect knowl-edge of the forward model parameters. We propose DeepGEM, a variational
Expectation-Maximization (EM) framework that can be used to solve for the un-known parameters of the forward model in an unsupervised manner. DeepGEM makes use of a normalizing ﬂow generative network to efﬁciently capture complex posterior distributions, which leads to more accurate evaluation of the source’s posterior distribution used in EM. We showcase the effectiveness of our DeepGEM approach by achieving strong performance on the challenging problem of blind seismic tomography, where we signiﬁcantly outperform the standard method used in seismology. We also demonstrate the generality of DeepGEM by applying it to a simple case of blind deconvolution. 1

Introduction
Physics-based inversion methods typically recover an unknown source from indirect measurements by assuming that the source and measurements are related via a known forward model [15, 7, 30]. For example, non-blind deconvolution algorithms often assume that a measured blurry image is related to its true sharp image via a known spatially-invariant blur kernel [9]; and traditional seismic inversion methods assume that the spatially-varying velocity of the Earth’s interior is known a priori when solving for an earthquake’s hypocenter [30]. However, these “known” forward models are generally idealized and ignore intricacies of the systems that are either hard to capture or simply unknown.
Inversion algorithms with forward model mismatch result in biased reconstructions. For instance, bias is regularly seen in non-blind deconvolution results, where reconstruction artifacts are often present due to the use of an incorrect blur kernel [9].
In order to reduce the effects of model mismatch, in this paper we tackle the problem of blind inversion: solving an inverse problem without knowledge of the underlying forward model parameters.
When considering how learning can help, a natural ﬁrst idea might be to learn a direct map from measurements to the desired source via supervised learning. However, such a “model-free” approach is generally not practical, due to the lack of available ground truth training data. For example, the blur kernel caused by handheld camera shake cannot be reproduced to get a training set of 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), .
sharp-blurry pairs to train a deconvolution approach. In seismic tomography, synthetic earthquakes cannot be placed densely throughout the interior of the Earth to measure the ground response as a function of hypocenter location. An alternative approach, which we adopt, is to develop unsupervised methods that treat the true forward model as something that is unobserved and must be inferred.
An additional consideration is that we must solve for the true forward model from a single dataset, without knowledge of the true source that produces the measurements
In this paper, we propose Deep Generalized Expectation-Maximization (DeepGEM) for solving blind inverse problems. Using the indirect measurements as input, DeepGEM jointly estimates the source and forward model that together produce the observed measurements. DeepGEM is a variational inference based framework that makes use of deep learning machinery to easily capture and optimize complex probabilistic distributions that cannot be easily integrated in analytic Expectation-Maximization (EM) solutions. Our proposed framework is generic and can be applied to blind inversion problems described by differentiable forward models. In Section 4 we showcase the effectiveness of our DeepGEM approach on the challenging problem of blind seismic tomography, where we signiﬁcantly outperform methods used in seismology. We also demonstrate the generality of DeepGEM by applying it to blind deconvolution in Section 5.
Figure 1: DeepGEM applied to blind seismic tomography. (a) A simulated cross section of the
Earth’s interior (velocity structure), along with the locations of receivers on the surface (red triangles) that collect measurements. (b) The time it takes for a wave traveling from a source below the surface to reach the speciﬁed receiver is visualized for each location in the region of interest. The overlaid dots represent the true locations of simulated earthquakes and indicate the measured travel times that constrain optimization. (c) The subsurface velocity reconstruction obtained using a baseline approach optimized with the help of a seismologist. Note that the bright anomaly is missing from this reconstruction. Overlaid dots represent the inferred earthquake locations. (d) DeepGEM reconstructed subsurface velocity and inferred earthquake locations. Note that DeepGEM is able to accurately recover the gradient of the velocity ﬁeld as well as partially recover the central anomaly. 2