Abstract
The advent of machine learning models that surpass human decision-making ability in complex domains has initiated a movement towards building AI systems that interact with humans. Many building blocks are essential for this activity, with a central one being the algorithmic characterization of human behavior. While much of the existing work focuses on aggregate human behavior, an important long-range goal is to develop behavioral models that specialize to individual people and can differentiate among them.
To formalize this process, we study the problem of behavioral stylometry, in which the task is to identify a decision-maker from their decisions alone. We present a transformer-based approach to behavioral stylometry in the context of chess, where one attempts to identify the player who played a set of games. Our method operates in a few-shot classiﬁcation framework, and can correctly identify a player from among thousands of candidate players with 98% accuracy given only 100 labeled games. Even when trained on amateur play, our method generalises to out-of-distribution samples of Grandmaster players, despite the dramatic differences between amateur and world-class players. Finally, we consider more broadly what our resulting embeddings reveal about human style in chess, as well as the potential ethical implications of powerful methods for identifying individuals from behavioral data. 1

Introduction
The advent of machine learning models that surpass human decision-making ability in complex domains raises the prospect of building AI systems that can collaborate and interact productively with humans. While many advances will be essential in order to achieve this far-reaching goal, algorithmically characterizing aspects of human behavior will be a signiﬁcant step. Whereas existing work focuses on characterizing human behavior in an aggregate or generic sense, genuine human-AI interaction will require specializing these characterizations to individual people.
Developing algorithms that can detect signatures of individual decision-making style would constitute an important advance for many reasons. First, being able to recognize an individual from their behavioural characteristics would greatly beneﬁt an AI system’s ability to coordinate with that individual. In general, decision-making styles can range from complementary to clashing, and a predictive characterization of an individual’s decisions would be useful for an AI system trying to adapt to their style. Second, such ﬁne-grained, individual-level characterizations would help isolate the distinguishing features of individual styles. In a domain where ML systems are able to match 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
or surpass human performance, it becomes natural to try extending these systems to pinpoint the types of decisions a person is particularly good at, and types of decisions they could potentially improve. Finally, applying these algorithms to many different individuals would shed light on the structure of decision-making in the domain itself. For example, certain instances could prove particularly discriminative in detecting individual style. In addition to these beneﬁts, the ability to identify individuals from behavioral traces also raises ethical concerns centered around privacy and generalization to high-stakes domains. We discuss the ethical consequences of our work in Section 5.
To formalize the above process, we study the problem of behavioral stylometry, in which the goal is to identify a decision-maker from their decisions alone. We pursue this task in the domain of chess, which for many reasons is an ideal model system for developing human-compatible algorithms. AI systems surpassed all human-level ability in chess at least 15 years ago. Despite this, millions of people at all skill levels still actively play. Through their activity, people generate detailed traces of their decisions, which are digitally recorded and publicly available. In chess, behavioral stylometry reduces to predicting the identity of a player from the moves they played in a given set of games.
We present a transformer-based approach to behavioral stylometry in chess. We show how to adapt recent work in speech veriﬁcation to the problem of detecting individual decision-making style.
Working in the domain of chess requires us to extend these methods to the complex types of data found in the game-playing structure of chess. We apply our model in a few-shot classiﬁcation setup, where only a small number of games are provided for the model to learn a representation of a player’s decisions, and the model must then identify the player from thousands of possible candidates, based on another small sample of their games. Compared to a recent approach, our method achieves high accuracy on this task, while being much more scalable and data-efﬁcient. Our resulting embeddings of players and their games reveals a structure of human style in chess, with players who are stylistically similar clustering together in the space. We consider the implications of these ﬁndings, including the potential ethical implications of identifying individuals from their behavioral data. 2