Abstract
Driven by the considerable profits, the crime of drug trafficking (a.k.a. illicit drug trading) has co-evolved with modern technologies, e.g., social media such as
Instagram has become a popular platform for marketing and selling illicit drugs.
The activities of online drug trafficking are nimble and resilient, which call for novel techniques to effectively detect, disrupt, and dismantle illicit drug trades.
In this paper, we propose a holistic framework named MetaHG to automatically detect illicit drug traffickers on social media (i.e., Instagram), by tackling the following two new challenges: (1) different from existing works which merely focus on analyzing post content, MetaHG is capable of jointly modeling multi-modal content and relational structured information on social media for illicit drug trafficker detection; (2) in addition, through the proposed meta-learning technique,
MetaHG addresses the issue of requiring sufficient data for model training. More specifically, in our proposed MetaHG, we first build a heterogeneous graph (HG) to comprehensively characterize the complex ecosystem of drug trafficking on social media. Then, we employ a relation-based graph convolutional neural network to learn node (i.e., user) representations over the built HG, in which we introduce graph structure refinement to compensate the sparse connection among entities in the HG for more robust node representation learning. Afterwards, we propose a meta-learning algorithm for model optimization. A self-supervised module and a knowledge distillation module are further designed to exploit unlabeled data for improving the model. Extensive experiments based on the real-world data collected from Instagram demonstrate that the proposed MetaHG outperforms state-of-the-art methods. 1

Introduction
As the market of illicit drugs (e.g., heroin, synthetic opioids such as Fentanyl) is considerably lucra-tive, the crime of drug trafficking (a.k.a. illicit drug trading) has never stopped but co-evolved with the advance of modern technologies, e.g., the practice of illicit drug trade has transformed from the physical world to online platforms. It has been shown that major social media platforms, including
Instagram, Twitter, Snapchat, and Facebook, have become direct-to-consumer marketing mediums for illicit drug traffickers [25]. As illustrated in Figure 1, due to the convenience and popularity, drug traffickers can easily create accounts on these platforms to advertise and sell drugs by posting code-words (e.g., street name) and images of drugs that are in stock (shown in Figure 1.(a)); they can also post their drug sale websites and utilize social media platforms for promotion (shown in Figure 1.(b)).
Buyers can access illicit drugs and trade with vendors easily through these social media platforms.
∗Corresponding authors. 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
Illegal drug trading has turn into a global concern due to its catastrophic consequences on society, from vi-olent crimes to public health (e.g., over 87,000 people died from drug overdose in 2020 in the U.S. and it broke the record with a 20% increase in a year [41]).
Despite the persistent effort by law enforcement agen-cies, due to the considerable profits, activities of on-line drug trafficking are nimble and resilient: as shown in Figure 1.(c), to avoid being banned, skilled drug traffickers (e.g., with 1,002 followers, and 118 fol-lowings) rarely post drug description or images on social media, but instead, they advertise drugs im-plicitly using the slang (e.g., using “KET” to refer ketamine) and leave encrypted chat tool contact infor-mation (e.g., Kik Messenger) through their comments to other users’ posts. To combat online drug trafficking, there is an imminent need to develop novel techniques for effective detection of drug traffickers on social media and thus enable law enforcement for proactive interventions to disrupt and dismantle illicit drug trades.
Figure 1: Showcase of drug trafficking on social media platform.
To tackle the above problem, there have been many research efforts on the investigation of online drug trafficking. Some existing works focus on analyzing the drug trafficking activities on darknet markets [46, 47, 9], while some methods have been proposed for detecting illicit drug trading activities on social media [20, 21, 22]. Most of these works usually rely on a single type of content feature (e.g., text or image) while ignoring the structured relationship information among entities on social media. For instance, Instagram monitors drug traffickers simply by filtering drug-related keyword hashtags (e.g., weed4sale) [14]. Unfortunately, as illustrated in Figure 1.(c), drug traffickers may always invent new tactics to evade detection. Those methods that fail to consider multi-modal features (e.g., both text and image) and the structural relationships among entities (e.g., users and posts) could limit the effectiveness of detecting drug trafficking activities. Additionally, most recent works [22, 23, 20] require sufficient labeled samples to train the model for the detection of drug trafficking. For example, Mackey et al. [23] collected almost 612,000 posts on Twitter and only found 1,778 drug trafficking-related posts. Obtaining labeled samples on social media is always expensive, and existing models may suffer from the constraint of few labeled data to detect drug traffickers.
To address the above challenges, in this paper, we propose a holistic framework named MetaHG (as shown in Figure 3) to automatically detect illicit drug traffickers on social media (i.e., using Instagram as a showcase). First, to overcome the shortcomings of merely analyzing a single type of content information (e.g., text or image), we propose to consider the multi-modal content features (i.e., both text and image) and introduce a heterogeneous graph (HG) to model the relationships among three types of entities (i.e., user, post, and keyword). The constructed HG is able to comprehensively characterize the complex ecosystem of drug trafficking on social media. And then we exploit relation-based graph convolutional neural networks (R-GCNs) [32] to fuse both relational information among entities and content features to obtain initial node embeddings over the built HG. Due to spare relational connections among some entities, we further introduce graph structure refinement (GSR) [24, 16] to learn more robust node representations on the HG. Furthermore, to address the few labeled data issue, we propose a meta-learning framework to transfer knowledge from training tasks and effectively adapt them to testing tasks (e.g., new types of drug traffickers with few labeled samples). More specifically, to exploit unlabeled information for better performance, our proposed model consists of two additional modules: an embedding similarity-based self-supervised learning module to augment R-GCNs for node representation refinement, and a knowledge distillation module to facilitate better model optimization. In summary, the major contributions of our work include:
• We study the illicit drug trafficker detection on social media and create a new dataset on Instagram (including text, image and relation information) for the problem, which is novel and urgent.
• To solve the problem, we develop a holistic yet novel framework (i.e., MetaHG) to jointly model both structured relations and unstructured content information for illicit drug trafficker detection, accounting for the constraints of graph sparsity and limited labeled data for model training.
• Comprehensive experiments on the real-world dataset demonstrate the outstanding performance of
MetaHG by comparison with the state-of-arts methods. To the best of our knowledge, MetaHG is the first work that automatically detects drug traffickers on social media using few labeled data. 2
• As drug overdose deaths have continued to increase over the past decade across the country, our proposed technique will have a significant societal impact to help address this critical issue. 2