Abstract
We initiate a systematic study on dynamic inﬂuence maximization (DIM). In the
DIM problem, one maintains a seed set S of at most k nodes in a dynamically involving social network, with the goal of maximizing the expected inﬂuence spread while minimizing the amortized updating cost. We consider two evolution models. In the incremental model, the social network gets enlarged over time and one only introduces new users and establishes new social links, we design an algorithm that achieves (1−1/e−(cid:15))-approximation to the optimal solution and has k · poly(log n, (cid:15)−1) amortized running time, which matches the state-of-art ofﬂine algorithm with only poly-logarithmic overhead. In the fully dynamic model, users join in and leave, inﬂuence propagation gets strengthened or weakened in real time, we prove that under the Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis (SETH), no algorithm can achieve 2−(log n)1−o(1)
-approximation unless the amortized running time is n1−o(1). On the technical side, we exploit novel adaptive sampling approaches that reduce DIM to the dynamic MAX-k coverage problem, and design an efﬁcient (1 − 1/e − (cid:15))-approximation algorithm for it. Our lower bound leverages the recent developed distributed PCP framework. 1

Introduction
Inﬂuence maximization (IM) is the algorithmic task of given a social network and a stochastic diffusion model, ﬁnding a seed set of at most k nodes with the largest expected inﬂuence spread over the network [35]. Inﬂuence maximization and its variants have been extensively studied in the literature over past decades [35, 13, 29, 45, 49, 38, 4, 22, 8], and it has applications in viral market, rumor control, advertising, etc.
Social inﬂuence can be highly dynamic and the propagation tendencies between users can alter dramatically over time. For example, in a Twitter network, new users join in and existing users drop out in real time, pop stars arise instantly for breaking news and trending topics; in a DBLP network, scientiﬁc co-authorship is built up and expands gradually over time. The classic IM algorithms make crucial assumptions on a stationary social network and they fail to capture the elastic nature of social networks. As a consequence, their seeding set could become outdated rapidly in a constantly involving social network. To mitigate the issue, one designs a dynamic inﬂuence maximization algorithm, which maintains a feasible seed set with high inﬂuence impact over time, and at the same time, saturates low average computation cost per update of the social network.
In this paper, we initiate a systematic study on the dynamic inﬂuence maximization (DIM) problem .
Two types of evolution models are of interests to us. In an incremental model1, the social networks keep growing: new users join in and new social relationship is built up or strengthened over time. The motivating example is the DBLP network, where co-authorship gets expanded over time. Another justiﬁcation is the preferential attachment involving model of social network [12, 41]. In a fully 1These terms are standard notions in the dynamic algorithm literature, e.g., see [30, 1] 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
dynamic model, the social network involves over time, users can join in and leave out, social links emerge and disappear, inﬂuence impacts get strengthened or weakened. The motivating examples are social media networks like Twitter or Facebook, and the advertising market.
There are some pioneer works on the topic of dynamic inﬂuence maximization and various heuristic algorithms have been proposed in the literature [52, 44, 24]. These algorithms have different kinds of approximation guarantee on the seed set, but the crucial drawback is that the amortized running time per update is no better than Ω(n), here n is the total number of nodes in a social network. This is extremely unsatisfactory from a theoretical view, as it indicates these algorithm do no better than re-run the state-of-art IM algorithm upon every update. Hence, the central question over the ﬁeld is that, can we achieve the optimal approximation guarantee with no signiﬁcant overhead on amortized running time?
Our contribution We address the above questions and provide clear resolutions. In the incremental model, we prove it is possible to maintain a seed set with (1 − 1/e − (cid:15))-approximation ratio in amortized running time of k · poly(log n, (cid:15)−1), which matches the state-of-art ofﬂine algorithm up to poly-logarithmic factors (Theorem 3.1). While in the fully dynamic algorithm, assuming the
Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis (SETH), we prove no algorithm can achieve 2−(log n)1−o(1) approximation unless the amortized running time is n1−o(1) (Theorem 4.3 and Theorem 4.4). This computational barrier draws a sharp separation between these two dynamic models and delivers the following surprising message: There is no hope to achieve any meaningful approximation guarantee for DIM, even one only aims for a slightly reduced running time than the naive approach of re-instantiating an IM algorithm upon every update.
On the technical side, our DIM algorithm in the incremental model uses novel adaptive sampling strategies and reduces the DIM problem to the dynamic MAX-k coverage problem. We provide an efﬁcient dynamic algorithm to the later problem. Both the adaptive sampling strategy and the combinatorial algorithm could be of independent interests to the inﬂuence maximization community and the submodular maximization community. For the computaional hardness result, we exploit a novel application of the recent developed distribution PCP framework for ﬁne grained complexity.