Abstract
Recent advances in deep neural networks allowed artiﬁcial agents to derive their own emergent languages that promote interaction, coordination, and collaboration within a group. Just as we humans have succeeded in creating a shared language that allows us to interact within a large group, can the emergent communication within an artiﬁcial group converge to a shared, agreed language? This research provides an analytical study of the shared emergent language within the group communication settings of different sizes and connectivities. As the group size increases up to hundreds, agents start to speak dissimilar languages, but the rate at which they successfully communicate is maintained. We observe the emergence of different dialects when we restrict group communication to have local connectivities only.
Finally, we provide optimization results of group communication graphs when the number of agents one can communicate with is restricted or when we penalize communication between distant agent pairs. The optimized communication graphs show superior communication success rates compared to graphs with the same number of links, as well as the emergence of hub nodes and scale-free networks. 1

Introduction
Communication plays a vital role for us humans to interact with one another [Austin, 1975, Allwood, 1976, Linell, 2009]. We acquire new information about the environment and other people around us through communication, which further facilitates collaboration or competition and allows us to coordinate our future decisions and actions better.
Over the past decades, numerous research outcomes have succeeded in mimicking human behav-ior and making artiﬁcial agents equipped with interactive communication abilities [Batali, 1998,
Cangelosi and Parisi, 2002, Christiansen and Kirby, 2003, Steels, 2003, Wagner et al., 2003]. The communication in the artiﬁcial system is emergent in a way that there are no pre-speciﬁed usage rules, semantics, or syntax, all of which are formed by the artiﬁcial agents upon their necessities [Lazaridou et al., 2017]. Not only does empowering agents with their own communicative abilities set an impor-tant milestone in interactive AI systems, it also brings us steps closer to the world where machines cooperate with humans [Mikolov et al., 2016, Crandall et al., 2018, Lazaridou and Baroni, 2020].
In human societies, hundreds of millions of people use the shared, agreed communication protocols to interact. As the group becomes more complex with increased size and connectivity, communication becomes more and more vital for us to coordinate with one another. Fortunately, we humans excel at using languages for large-group coordination and problem-solving [Tomasello, 2010, Lupyan and
Bergen, 2016]. However, in the AI system counterpart, the question of how emergent communication will function under different group settings is understudied. As the group becomes more complex, will emergent communication become more effective for the system in promoting group coordination, as in human society, or will it lose its functionality? Will the emergent communication still converge 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
BOUBA!
≠
KIKI!
Agent 1
Agent 2
Color-only  agents
Shape-only  agents
C1
C2
C3
Communication 
Channel
S1
S2
S3
<Find a blue circle>
Listener (c or s)
Speaker (c or s)
VAE z (Ocl, Ocr)
Concat
Tokenize
“Blue circle” w
≈ z w h h
Left ! d h h
…m (Osl, Osr)
≈
“Blue circle” (Descritize)
Figure 1: Left: A scenario in which two agents speak different languages to describe the same object.
Middle: Bi-partite group communication using a variant of the referential game, involving color-only agents c and shape-only agents s. Right: Communication model architecture between speaker and listener agents. Both color-only agent c and shape-only agent s can be speakers and listeners. to a shared, agreed language? In the worst case, efﬁcient interaction among agents through emergent communication can be hampered because different agents will start to use different languages to describe the same observation (the left-most panel of Figure 1).
This research provides an analytical study on emergent communication in artiﬁcial groups of different sizes and connectivities. Our goal is to investigate the effect of emergent communication and analyze how agents’ general agreement on the communication protocol changes under varying group settings. To study this question, we construct settings within which communication among agents is indispensable for achieving their shared goals. Communication is their only means to interact and compensate for their limited access to information from an environment. We divide agents into two groups and allow an agent to communicate with another agent in a different group through a bi-partite communication graph.
To quantitatively evaluate the functional aspect of communication, we look at (a) the language similarity or message agreement of agents within the same group when describing the same referents and (b) the rate at which an arbitrary pair of agents in the bi-partite communication group succeed in communication and achieve the shared goal.
To this end, our contributions and ﬁndings are as follows: (1) We ﬁnd that as the size of the communication graph scales up to hundreds, the language used in the group becomes less similar amongst agents. However, the communication success rate is maintained. (2) We observe that when agents only get to communicate with nearby agents, a particular form of communication peculiar to agents’ locality emerges. At the same time, distant pairs of agents that have not interacted during training can still communicate when a certain threshold for the maximal communication distance is reached. (3) We present and analyze the optimized communication graph in terms of overall communication success rate when (a) the node outdegrees are ﬁxed or when (b) we penalize the formation of communication links between a distant pair of agents. Compared to the fully-connected all-to-all graph, the link density decreases by 81.25%, but the communication success rate drops just by 5.89%. With random, unoptimized communication links, the success rate drops by over 40% with the same link density. Throughout the optimization process, we observe the emergence of hub nodes taking up a large share of the total communication channels and connecting the majority of other agent nodes, as we see in the real-world scale-free social networks [Barabási and Albert, 1999]. 2