Abstract
Clustering is a fundamental unsupervised learning problem where a dataset is partitioned into clusters that consist of nearby points in a metric space. A recent variant, fair clustering, associates a color with each point representing its group membership and requires that each color has (approximately) equal representation in each cluster to satisfy group fairness. In this model, the cost of the clustering objective increases due to enforcing fairness in the algorithm. The relative increase in the cost, the “price of fairness,” can indeed be unbounded. Therefore, in this paper we propose to treat an upper bound on the clustering objective as a constraint on the clustering problem, and to maximize equality of representation subject to it.
We consider two fairness objectives: the group utilitarian objective and the group egalitarian objective, as well as the group leximin objective which generalizes the group egalitarian objective. We derive fundamental lower bounds on the approximation of the utilitarian and egalitarian objectives and introduce algorithms with provable guarantees for them. For the leximin objective we introduce an effective heuristic algorithm. We further derive impossibility results for other natural fairness objectives. We conclude with experimental results on real-world datasets that demonstrate the validity of our algorithms. 1

Introduction
Machine learning algorithms are increasingly being applied to settings that directly inﬂuence human lives. This has spurred a growing fair machine learning community [9], which develops machine learning algorithms that are made to satisfy certain fairness criteria. Choosing an appropriate deﬁnition of fairness—and even deciding if explicitly deﬁning fairness is appropriate to begin with— is a morally-laden and application-speciﬁc decision [28, 43]. We make no normative statements here; rather, we focus on a commonly-used and often legally-backed family of fairness deﬁnitions—group fairness—in the context of clustering, arguably the most fundamental unsupervised learning problem.
A recent group-membership fairness deﬁnition, called fair clustering in the literature, has received signiﬁcant interest [20, 10, 11, 2, 7, 31, 22, 8, 3, 33, 1]. In fair clustering, each point has a color that designates its group membership, and a clustering objective such as k-median or k-means is given.
The goal is to ﬁnd a clustering that minimizes the objective subject to the constraint that each cluster has each color represented within some pre-speciﬁed proportions. For example, there may be two colors, red and blue, and the constraint could require per-color representation between 40% and 60%.
An acknowledged fact in fair clustering—and, indeed, in many allocation and matching settings—is that the fairness (e.g., proportion) constraint could cause degradation in the clustering objective [12, 19]. A point may be assigned to a further away center (cluster) to satisfy the proportion constraint [20]. 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
The degradation in the objective due to the imposed fairness constraint is called the price of fairness (PoF), mathematically deﬁned as PoF = (cost of fair solution) / (cost of agnostic solution).
Unlike some examples in the literature [12, 21], the price of fairness in the case of fair clustering is unbounded, as seen in Figure 1. By enforcing a form of group fairness requiring an even split across colors in each cluster, a fair clustering algorithm would perform arbitrarily poorly as the two groups of points separate in space, while a “color-blind” algorithm would remain unchanged (bottom-left and bottom-right of Figure 1, respectively). The possibly unbounded increase in the clustering cost (unbounded price of fairness) indicates that fair clustering can yield clusters consisting of points that are far apart in the metric space instead of combining nearby points—often the main motivation behind clustering in machine learning and data analysis. Furthermore, the legal notion of disparate impact does not force an organization to output a fair clustering if it can justify an unfair one due to “business necessity,” i.e., potential loss in quality [45, 44]. This possible conﬂict between the clustering objective and the fairness constraint indicates the need for fair clustering algorithms that operate in a setting where the clustering cost cannot exceed a pre-set upper bound.
Figure 1: Comparison between group fair (left) and color-blind (right) clustering. Un-like color-blind clusters, group fair clusters may combine faraway points (bottom-left).
Our Contributions. In this paper, we address fair clustering under an exogenous threshold on the clustering objective. We formulate the problem mathematically in a general setting that captures all of the traditional k-clustering objectives, i.e. k-center, k-median, and k-means. Throughout, we focus on two general formulations of group fairness: GROUP-UTILITARIAN and GROUP-EGALITARIAN, along with the GROUP-LEXIMIN objective which generalizes the traditional GROUP-EGALITARIAN deﬁnition. We show that these objectives lead to problems that are NP-hard in general. Further, assuming P (cid:54)= N P we derive lower bounds on the additive approximation of any polynomial time algorithm for the GROUP-UTILITARIAN and GROUP-EGALITARIAN objectives. We provide bi-criteria approximation algorithms for the GROUP-UTILITARIAN and GROUP-EGALITARIAN objectives in which the constraint has a bounded violation and the objective is bounded from the optimal value by an additive error. For the GROUP-LEXIMIN objective we provide an effective heuristic. Further, we consider other possibly more “ﬂexible” fairness objectives, but demonstrate inapproximability results for them. Finally, we test the performance of our algorithms on a collection of datasets and see that we obtain good solutions with low “fairness violations.” We note that due to the page limit, all proofs are placed in Appendix A. 2