Abstract
Fine-grained zero-shot learning task requires some form of side-information to transfer discriminative information from seen to unseen classes. As manually annotated visual attributes are extremely costly and often impractical to obtain for a large number of classes, in this study we use DNA as side information for the
ﬁrst time for ﬁne-grained zero-shot classiﬁcation of species. Mitochondrial DNA plays an important role as a genetic marker in evolutionary biology and has been used to achieve near perfect accuracy in species classiﬁcation of living organisms.
We implement a simple hierarchical Bayesian model that uses DNA information to establish the hierarchy in the image space and employs local priors to deﬁne surrogate classes for unseen ones. On the benchmark CUB dataset we show that
DNA can be equally promising, yet in general a more accessible alternative than word vectors as a side information. This is especially important as obtaining robust word representations for ﬁne-grained species names is not a practicable goal when information about these species in free-form text is limited. On a newly compiled
ﬁne-grained insect dataset that uses DNA information from over a thousand species we show that the Bayesian approach outperforms state-of-the-art by a wide margin. 1

Introduction
Fine-grained species classiﬁcation is essential in monitoring biodiversity. Diversity of life is the central tenet to biology and preserving biodiversity is key to a more sustainable life. Monitoring biodiversity requires identifying living organisms at the lowest taxonomic level possible. The traditional approach to identiﬁcation uses published morphological dichotomous keys to identify the collected sample. This identiﬁcation involves a tedious process of manually assessing the presence or absence of a long list of morphological traits arranged at hierarchical levels. The analysis is often performed in a laboratory setting by a well-trained human taxonomist and is difﬁcult to do at scale.
Fortunately, advances in technology have addressed this challenge to some extent through the use of 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
DNA barcodes. DNA barcoding is a technique that uses a short section of DNA from a speciﬁc gene, such as cytochrome C oxidase I (COI), found in mitochondrial DNA, and offers speciﬁc information about speciation in living organisms and can achieve nearly perfect classiﬁcation accuracy at the species level (26; 17).
As it is costly to obtain the label information for ﬁne-grained image classiﬁcation of species, Zero-Shot
Learning (ZSL) that handles missing label information is a suitable task. In ZSL, side information is used to associate seen and unseen classes. Popular choices for side-information are manually annotated attributes (21; 12), word embeddings (41; 14; 27) derived from free-form text or the
WordNet hierarchy (28; 2). It is often assumed that an exhaustive list of visual attributes characterizing all object classes (both seen and unseen) can be determined based only on seen classes. However, taking insects as our object classes, if no seen class species have antennae, the attribute list may not contain antenna, which may in fact be necessary to distinguish unseen species. In the United
States alone, more than 40% of all insect species (>70,000) remain undescribed (42), which is a clear sign of the limitations of existing identiﬁcation techniques that rely on visual attributes. Similarly, free-form text is unlikely to contain sufﬁciently descriptive information about ﬁne-grained objects to generate discriminative vector embeddings. For example, tiger beetle is a class in the ImageNet dataset. However, the tiger beetle group itself contains thousands of known species and the Wikipedia pages for these species either do not exist or are limited to short text that does not necessarily contain any information about species’ morphological characteristics. WordNet hierarchy may not be useful either as most of the species names do not exist in WordNet.
Given that DNA information can be readily available for training (35; 36), species-level DNA information can be used as highly speciﬁc side information to replace high-level semantic information in ZSL. For seen classes, species-level DNA information can be obtained by ﬁnding the consensus nucleotide sequence among samples of a given species or by averaging corresponding sequence embeddings of samples. For unseen classes, species-level DNA information can be obtained from actual samples, if available, in the same way as seen classes, or can be simulated in a non-trivial way to represent potentially existing species.
Our approach uses DNA as side information for the ﬁrst time for zero-shot classiﬁcation of species. In
ﬁne-grained, large-scale species classiﬁcation, no other side information can explain class dichotomy better than DNA, as new species are explicitly deﬁned based on variations in DNA. The hierarchical
Bayesian model leverages the implicit inter-species association of DNA and phenotypic traits and ultimately allows us to establish a Bayesian hierarchy based on DNA similarity between unseen and seen classes. We compare DNA against word representations for assessing class similarity and show that the Bayesian model that uses DNA to identify similar classes achieves favorable results compared to the version that uses word representations on a well-known ZSL benchmark species dataset involving slightly less than 200 bird species. In the particular case of an insect dataset with over 1000 species, when visual attributes or word representations may not offer feasible alternatives, we show that our hierarchical model that relies on DNA to establish class hierarchy signiﬁcantly outperforms all other embedding-based methods and feature generating networks.
Our contributions are on three fronts. First, we introduce DNA as side information for ﬁne-grained
ZSL tasks, implement a Convolutional Neural Net (CNN) model to learn DNA barcode embeddings, and show that the embeddings are robust and highly speciﬁc for closed-set classiﬁcation of species, even when training and test sets of species are mutually exclusive. We use the benchmark CUB dataset as a case study to show that DNA embeddings are competitive to word embeddings as side information. Second, we propose a ﬁne-grained insect dataset involving 21, 212 matching image/DNA pairs from 578 genera and 1, 213 species as a new benchmark dataset and discuss the limitations of current ZSL paradigms for ﬁne-grained ZSL tasks when there is no strong association between side information and image features. Third, we perform extensive studies to show that a simple hierarchical Bayesian model that uses DNA as side information outperforms state-of-the-art
ZSL techniques on the newly introduced insect dataset by a wide margin. 2