Abstract
Accurately predicting inter-frame motion information plays a key role in video prediction tasks. In this paper, we propose a Motion-Aware Unit (MAU) to capture reliable inter-frame motion information by broadening the temporal receptive field of the predictive units. The MAU consists of two modules, the attention module and the fusion module. The attention module aims to learn an attention map based on the correlations between the current spatial state and the historical spatial states.
Based on the learned attention map, the historical temporal states are aggregated to an augmented motion information (AMI). In this way, the predictive unit can perceive more temporal dynamics from a wider receptive field. Then, the fusion module is utilized to further aggregate the augmented motion information (AMI) and current appearance information (current spatial state) to the final predicted frame. The computation load of MAU is relatively low, and the proposed unit can be easily applied to other predictive models. Moreover, an information recalling scheme is employed into the encoders and decoders to help preserve the visual details of the predictions. We evaluate the MAU on both video prediction and early action recognition tasks. Experimental results show that the MAU outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on both tasks.
∗Corresponding author: Shanshe Wang. 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
1

Introduction
Video prediction is a representative task in video predictive learning area, which aims to predict the unknown future on the basis of the limited knowledge and has been applied in a wide range of research areas, such as robotic control [1], video interpolation [2], autonomous driving [3], motion planning
[4] and so on. However, compared with images, videos are more complex due to the time-varying motion information and predicting reliable motion information has always been a significant but challenging problem for video prediction tasks. Fortunately, deep learning technologies have shown their great power in learning meaningful features for multimedia data and have achieved great success in computer vision and natural language processing tasks. Motivated by this, learning-based methods have been applied for video prediction in recent years.
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are first applied to learn video representations due to their unique advantages in modeling sequential data [5]. Then the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [6] and
Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) [7] are integrated into RNNs to help capture more reliable inter-frame temporal dependency [1, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15]. In general, to save the computation resources and help predictive units to better perceive visual information, the fully connected layers in the predictive memories are replaced by convolutional layers in the above methods. Although the spatial receptive field of the unit has been improved by the integrated convolutional layers, the temporal receptive field is still narrow, and it is difficult for the unit at current time step to perceive what has happened in a longer past, which severely restrict the model expressivity to inter-frame motion information and the performance in predicting videos with complex scenarios and high resolutions is far from satisfactory.
Some works have attempted to broaden the temporal receptive field for the predictive units using 3D convolutional layers [16, 17]. However, the temporal receptive field is mainly determined by the kernel size of the integrated convolutional operators and the temporal dimension still needs to be set to a small value to meet the computation load requirement. Since then, the explorations for broadening the temporal receptive field for predictive models have been shelved and a variety of works begin to explore other ways to improve the expressivity of the model on videos with complex scenarios, which can be roughly categorized into two types, the structure-oriented methods and the loss-oriented methods. The structure-oriented methods utilized deep stochastic models to predict different futures for different samples based on their latent variables [18, 19, 20, 21]. However, the computation load of these methods is typically high, preventing their practicability in real world. And the loss-oriented methods aim to improve the traditional mean square error (MSE) based loss functions to generate more naturalistic results. Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [22, 23, 24, 25], perceptual loss
[26] and so on have been utilized to generate results with higher perceptual quality. In spite of the explorations made by the above methods, only limited model performance improvements have been achieved and the unsatisfactory temporal receptive field still restricts the model performance in capturing reliable motion information between frames.
To solve the above problem, we propose the Motion-Aware Unit (MAU) to improve the model expressivity in capturing motion information by efficiently broadening the temporal receptive field.
In particular, for each MAU, two modules are designed, the attention module and the fusion module.
The attention module is designed for efficient attention and the fusion module is designed for efficient fusion. In particular, the attention module aims to help the unit to pay different levels of attention to the temporal states in the broadened temporal receptive field based on the corresponding spatial correlation scores. Using the attention scores, the temporal states can be aggregated to a more reliable augmented motion information (AMI) with a low computation load. The fusion module aims to further aggregate the augmented motion information (AMI) and the appearance information (the spatial state from current time step) using only two update gates. Moreover, an information recalling scheme is applied to further preserve the visual details of the predictions. Experimental results show that the proposed MAU can outperform other state-of-the-art methods on both video prediction and early action recognition tasks. 2