Abstract
Individual’s opinions are fundamentally shaped and evolved by their interactions with other people, and social phenomena such as disagreement and polarization are now tightly woven into daily life. The quantiﬁcation and optimization of these concepts have been the subject of much recent research behind a wealth of high-impact data mining applications. In particular, researchers have addressed the question of how such concepts can be optimized by inﬂuencing the opinion of a small number of individuals or by designing the network from scratch.
Here, rather than a “design-from-scratch” approach or altering the initial opinion, we study the optimization problem of recommending k new links to minimize the sum of polarization and disagreement in a social network with n nodes and m edges. We show that our objective function of this combinatorial optimization problem is not submodular, although it is monotone. We propose a simple greedy algorithm with a constant-factor approximation that solves the problem in cubic running time, and we provide theoretical analysis of the approximation guarantee for the algorithm. To overcome the computation challenge for large networks, we also provide a fast algorithm with computation complexity (cid:101)O(mk(cid:15)−2) for any (cid:15) > 0, where the (cid:101)O(·) notation suppresses the poly(log n) factors. Extensive experiments on real datasets demonstrate both the efﬁciency and effectiveness of our algorithms. 1

Introduction
Social networks and social media play a prominent part in the propagation, evolution, and formu-lation of opinions [32], leading to fundamental changes in how humans share and shape opinions.
Particularly, in recent years, the tremendous prevalence of online social media platforms produces various social phenomena, such as polarization and disagreement. The identiﬁcation [48] and opti-mization [50] of these quantities are fundamental tasks behind a myriad of high-impact data mining applications, and thus have received considerable attention.
We focus on the phenomena of disagreement and polarization. Disagreement [39, 16] characterizes how much acquaintances disagree in their opinions, globally across the network. Polarization [39, 36, 16] measures how equilibrium expressed opinions deviate from their average. However, existing recommender systems, trained on real-data, with the goal to increase user engagement may stop the user from being exposed to diverse opinions and naturally end up creating “echo-chambers”. In other words, the recommended links minimizing disagreement may lead to greater polarization [39] since connections between users with similar mindsets are preferred for such systems. Yet, exposure to diverse content is necessary to obtain a complete picture about a topic [27]. Thus, there is a need
∗Corresponding author. 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
for a radically different approach to suggest links that decrease both disagreement and polarization, which motivates our work.
In this paper, we address the following optimization problem: given a social network with n nodes and m edges, and an integer k, how to strategically recommend k links to the individuals so that the polarization and disagreement is minimized. We show that our objective function of this combinatorial optimization problem is not submodular, although it is monotone. To tackle the exponential computation complexity, we resort to greedy algorithm extended for non-submodular function [5] by iteratively adding the most promising edges. We propose a simple greedy algorithm with a constant-factor approximation that solves the problem in cubic running time. To confront the computation challenge for large networks, we also provide a fast algorithm with computation complexity (cid:101)O(mk(cid:15)−2) for any (cid:15) > 0, where (cid:15) > 0 is the error parameter and the (cid:101)O(·) notation suppresses the poly(log n) factors. We conﬁrm our theoretical and algorithmic performance by executing extensive experiments on various real networks, which show that our algorithms are efﬁcient and effective, outperforming several other strategies of creating edges.
Omitted proofs and implementation are provided as supplementary material. 2