Abstract
This paper presents a problem in power networks that creates an exciting and yet challenging real-world scenario for application of multi-agent reinforcement learn-ing (MARL). The emerging trend of decarbonisation is placing excessive stress on power distribution networks. Active voltage control is seen as a promising solution to relieve power congestion and improve voltage quality without extra hardware investment, taking advantage of the controllable apparatuses in the network, such as roof-top photovoltaics (PVs) and static var compensators (SVCs). These control-lable apparatuses appear in a vast number and are distributed in a wide geographic area, making MARL a natural candidate. This paper formulates the active voltage control problem in the framework of Dec-POMDP and establishes an open-source environment. It aims to bridge the gap between the power community and the
MARL community and be a drive force towards real-world applications of MARL algorithms. Finally, we analyse the special characteristics of the active voltage control problems that cause challenges (e.g. interpretability) for state-of-the-art
MARL approaches, and summarise the potential directions. 1

Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has demonstrated impressive performances on games (e.g., Chess [1], StarCraft [2, 3], and etc.) and robotics [4]. There are now increasing interests and thrusts to apply MARL in real-world problems. Power network is a natural test ﬁeld for MARL algorithms. There are many problems in power networks involving the collaborative or competitive actions of a vast number of agents, such as market bidding [5], voltage control, frequency control, and emergency handling [6]. One of the obstacles for applying MARL in power networks is the lack of transparency and guarantee, which is unacceptable considering the importance of reliable power supply for the whole society. Therefore, it is sensible to start with problems that are less sensitive to reliability but hard to be solved by conventional methods.
Active voltage control in power distribution networks is such a candidate problem. The voltage control problem has been studied for years but only comes under spot light recently due to the increasing penetration of distributed resources, e.g. roof-top photovoltaics (PVs) [7]. The excessive active power injection may cause voltage ﬂuctuations beyond the threshold of grid standards [8]. The voltage ﬂuctuations can be relieved by exploiting the control ﬂexibility of PV inverters themselves
∗Equal contributions. † Correspondence to Yunjie Gu who is also an honorary lecturer at Imperial College
London. ‡ Tim C. Green is also the co-director of the Energy Futures Laboratory (EFL). 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
along with other controllable apparatuses, such as static var compensators (SVCs) and on load tap changers (OLTCs). An elaborate scheme is needed to coordinate these multiple apparatuses at scale to regulate voltage throughout the network with limited local information, which is called active voltage control [9–12]. The active voltage control problem has many interesting properties. (1) It is a combination of local and global problem, i.e., the voltage of each node is inﬂuenced by the powers (real and reactive) of all other nodes but the impact recedes with increasing distance between nodes. (2) It is a constrained optimisation problem where the constraint is the voltage threshold and the objective is the total power loss, but there is no explicit relationship between the constraint and the control action. (3) A distribution network has a radial topology involving a rich structure that can be taken as prior knowledge for control, but the node-branch parameters of the topology may be signiﬁcantly uncertain. (4) Voltage control has a relatively large tolerance and less severe consequences if the control fails to meet standard requirements.
There have been several attempts to apply MARL in active voltage control [6, 13–16]. Each work on a particular case showed promising performances of state-of-the-art MARL approaches with modiﬁcations adapting to the active voltage control problem. However, it is not clear if these methods scale well to a larger network, and the robustness against different scenarios, such as penetration levels and load proﬁles, are yet to be investigated. There is no commonly accepted benchmark to provide the basis for fair comparison of different solutions.
To facilitate further research on this topic, and to bridge the gap between the power community and
MARL community, we present a comprehensive test-bench and open-source environment for MARL based active voltage control. We formally deﬁne the active voltage control problem as a Dec-POMDP
[17] that is widely acknowledged in the MARL community. We present an environment in Python and construct 3 scenarios with real public data that span from small scale (i.e. 6 agents) to large scale (i.e. 38 agents).
The contributions of this paper are summarised as follows: (1) We formally deﬁne the active voltage control problem as a Dec-POMDP and develop an open-source environment.2 (2) We conduct large scale experimentation with 7 state-of-the-art MARL algorithms on different scenarios of the active voltage control problem. (3) We convert voltage constraints to barrier functions and observe the importance of designing an appropriate voltage barrier function from the experimental results. (4) By analysing the experimental results, we imply the possible challenges (e.g. interpretability) for MARL to solve the active voltage control problem and suggest potential directions for future works. 2