Abstract 
With the explosive growth of information technology, multi-view graph data have  become increasingly prevalent and valuable. Most existing multi-view clustering  techniques either focus on the scenario of multiple graphs or multi-view attributes. 
In this paper, we propose a generic framework to cluster multi-view attributed  graph data. Specifcally, inspired by the success of contrastive learning, we propose  multi-view contrastive graph clustering (MCGC) method to learn a consensus graph  since the original graph could be noisy or incomplete and is not directly applicable. 
Our method composes of two key steps:  we frst flter out the undesirable high-frequency noise while preserving the graph geometric features via graph fltering  and obtain a smooth representation of nodes;  we then learn a consensus graph  regularized  by  graph  contrastive  loss.  Results  on  several  benchmark  datasets  show the superiority of our method with respect to state-of-the-art approaches. In  particular, our simple approach outperforms existing deep learning-based methods.  1

Introduction 
An attributed graph contains of node features and edges characterizing the pairwise relations between  nodes.  It is a natural and effcient representation for many real-world data [Liu et al., 2021].  For  example, social network users have their own profles and the topological graph refects their social  relationships.  Different  from  most  classical  clustering  methods  like  K-means  and  hierarchical  clustering which only focus on Euclidean data, graph clustering divides unlabeled nodes of graph  into clusters. Typical graph clustering methods frst learn a good representation of graph and then  apply a classical clustering method upon the embeddings.  For example, large-scale information  network embedding (LINE) [Tang et al., 2015] is a popular graph representation learning method,  which can preserve both local and global information and scale up easily to large-scale networks. 
To  incorporate  node  features  and  graph  structure  information,  graph  autoencoder  (GAE)  [Kipf  and Welling, 2016] employs a graph convolution network (GCN) encoder and achieves signifcant  performance improvement. The real-life data are often collected from various sources or obtained  from different extractors, thus are naturally represented by different features or views [Kang et al.,  2021, 2020c].  Each view could be noisy and incomplete, but important factors, such as geometry  and semantics, tend to be shared among all views. Therefore, features and graphs of different views  are complementary, which implies that it’s paramount to integrate all features and graphs of diverse  views to improve the performance of clustering task. 
Numerous graph-based multi-view clustering methods have been developed to capture the consensus  information shared by different views in the literature. Graph-based multi-view clustering constructs a  graph for each view and fuses them based on a weighting mechanism [Wang et al., 2019]. Multi-view  spectral clustering network [Huang et al., 2019] learns a discriminative representation by using a  deep metric learning network. These methods are developed for feature matrix and can not handle  graph data. To directly process graph data, some representative methods have also been proposed. 
∗Corresponding author.  35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021). 
Scalable multiplex network embedding (MNE) [Zhang et al., 2018] is a scalable multi-view network  embedding model,  which learns multiple relations by a unifed network embedding framework. 
Principled  multilayer  network  embedding  (PMNE)  [Liu  et  al.,  2017]  proposes  three  strategies  (“network  aggregation”,  “results  aggregation”,  and  “layer  co-analysis”)  to  project  a  multilayer  network into a continuous vector space. Nevertheless, they fail to explore the feature information 
[Lin and Kang, 2021]. 
Recently, based on GCN, One2Multi graph autoencoder clustering (O2MA) framework [Fan et al.,  2020] and multi-view attribute GCNs for clustering (MAGCN) [Cheng et al., 2020] achieve superior  performance on graph clustering. O2MA introduces a graph autoencoder to learn node embeddings  based  on  one  informative  graph  and  reconstruct  multiple  graphs.  However,  the  shared  feature  representation of multiple graphs could be incomplete because O2MA only takes into account the  informative view selected by modularity. MAGCN exploits the abundant information of all views  and adopts a cross-view consensus learning by enforcing the representations of different views to be  as similar as possible. Nevertheless, O2MA targets for multiple graphs while MAGCN mainly solves  graph structured data of multi-view attributes. They are not directly applicable to multiple graphs  data with multi-view attributes. Therefore, the research of multi-view graph clustering is at the initial  stage and more dedicated efforts are pressingly needed. 
In this paper, we propose a generic framework of clustering on attributed graph data with multi-view features and multiple topological graphs, denoted by Multi-view Contrastive Graph Clustering  (MCGC). To be exact, MCGC learns a new consensus graph by exploring the holistic information  among various attributes and graphs rather than utilizing the initial graph. The reason of introducing  graph  learning  is  that  the  initial  graph  is  often  noisy  or  incomplete,  which  leads  to  suboptimal  solutions [Chen et al., 2020b, Kang et al., 2020b]. A contrastive loss is adopted as regularization to  make the consensus graph clustering-friendly. Moreover, we implement on the smooth representation  rather than raw data. The contributions of this work could be summarized as follows: 
•  To boost the quality of learned graph, we propose a novel contrastive loss at graph-level. It  is capable of drawing similar nodes close and pushing those dissimilar ones apart. 
•  We propose a generic clustering framework to handle multilayer graphs with multi-view  attributes, which contains graph fltering, graph learning, and graph contrastive components. 
The graph fltering is simple and effcient to obtain a smoothed representation; the graph  learning is utilized to generate the consensus graph with an adaptive weighting mechanism  for different views. 
•  Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance compared with shallow methods and deep  methods on fve benchmark datasets.  2