Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been widely applied to various ﬁelds for learning over graph-structured data. They have shown signiﬁcant improvements over traditional heuristic methods in various tasks such as node classiﬁcation and graph classiﬁcation. However, since GNNs heavily rely on smoothed node features rather than graph structure, they often show poor performance than simple heuris-tic methods in link prediction where the structural information, e.g., overlapped neighborhoods, degrees, and shortest paths, is crucial. To address this limitation, we propose Neighborhood Overlap-aware Graph Neural Networks (Neo-GNNs) that learn useful structural features from an adjacency matrix and estimate over-lapped neighborhoods for link prediction. Our Neo-GNNs generalize neighborhood overlap-based heuristic methods and handle overlapped multi-hop neighborhoods.
Our extensive experiments on Open Graph Benchmark datasets (OGB) demonstrate that Neo-GNNs consistently achieve state-of-the-art performance in link prediction. 1

Introduction
Graph-structured data is ubiquitous in a wide range of domains ranging from social network analysis
[1, 2, 3] to biology [4, 5, 6, 7] and computer vision [8, 9, 10]. In recent years, numerous variants of
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have been proposed for learning representations over graph-structured data. GNNs learn low dimensional representations of nodes or graphs via iterative aggregation of features from neighbors using non-linear transformations.
In this manner, GNNs have shown signiﬁcant improvements over traditional methods, e.g., heuristic methods and embedding-based methods, and achieved state-of-the-art performance on various tasks, such as node classiﬁcation
[11, 12, 13, 14, 15], graph classiﬁcation [16, 17, 18, 19, 20], and graph generation [21, 22, 23, 24].
However, in link prediction, traditional heuristic methods still show competitive performance com-pared to GNNs, which often even outperform GNNs. This is because structural information, (e.g., overlapped neighborhoods, degrees, and shortest path), is crucial for link prediction whereas GNNs heavily rely on smoothed node features rather than graph structure. Recently, SEAL [25] has been proposed to consider structural information for link prediction by utilizing the relative distance between the target node pair and their neighborhoods. Nonetheless, SEAL requires the expensive computational cost to apply a GNN independently to an extracted subgraph for each target node pair.
To address this limitation, we propose Neighborhood Overlap-aware Graph Neural Networks (Neo-GNNs) that are designed to consider key structural information regarding links without manual processes. Speciﬁcally, instead of using input node features, Neo-GNNs ﬁrst learn to generate useful structrual features for each node from an adjacency matrix. Then Neo-GNNs measure the existence of links by considering the structural features of overlapped neighbhorhoods via neighbhorhood
∗corresponding author 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
overlap-aware aggregation scheme. Finally, to consider both structural information and input node features, our proposed model adaptively combines scores from Neo-GNNs and feature-based GNNs in an end-to-end fashion. We show that Neo-GNNs consistently outperform both state-of-the-art
GNNs and heuristic methods on four Open Graph Benchmark datasets (OGB) for link prediction.
Furthermore, Our Neo-GNNs generalize the neighborhood overlap-based heuristic methods which measure the likelihood of the link based on manually designed structural information of overlapped neighbors.
Our contributions are as follows: (i) We propose Neighborhood Overlap-aware Graph Neural
Networks (Neo-GNNs) that learn useful structural features from an adjacency matrix and estimate overlapped neighborhoods for link prediction. (ii) Neo-GNNs generalize neighborhood overlap-based heuristic methods and handle overlapped multi-hop neighborhoods. (iii) Our extensive experi-ments on Open Graph Benchmark datasets (OGB) demonstrate that Neo-GNNs consistently achieve state-of-the-art performance in link prediction. 2