Abstract
Recent advances in localized implicit functions have enabled neural implicit rep-resentation to be scalable to large scenes. However, the regular subdivision of 3D space employed by these approaches fails to take into account the sparsity of the surface occupancy and the varying granularities of geometric details. As a result, its memory footprint grows cubically with the input volume, leading to a prohibitive computational cost even at a moderately dense decomposition. In this work, we present a learnable hierarchical implicit representation for 3D surfaces, coded OctField, that allows high-precision encoding of intricate surfaces with low memory and computational budget. The key to our approach is an adaptive de-composition of 3D scenes that only distributes local implicit functions around the surface of interest. We achieve this goal by introducing a hierarchical octree struc-ture to adaptively subdivide the 3D space according to the surface occupancy and the richness of part geometry. As octree is discrete and non-differentiable, we further propose a novel hierarchical network that models the subdivision of octree cells as a probabilistic process and recursively encodes and decodes both octree structure and surface geometry in a differentiable manner. We demonstrate the value of OctField for a range of shape modeling and reconstruction tasks, show-ing superiority over alternative approaches. 1

Introduction
Geometric 3D representation has been central to the tasks in computer vision and computer graphics, ranging from high-level applications, such as scene understanding, object recognition and classifica-tion, etc, to low-level tasks, including 3D shape reconstruction, interpolation and manipulation. To accommodate with various application scenarios, a universal and effective 3D representation for 3D deep learning should have the following properties: (1) compatibility with arbitrary topologies, (2) capacity of modeling fine geometric details, (3) scalability to intricate shapes, (4) support efficient encoding of shape priors, (5) compact memory footprint, and (6) high computational efficiency.
While explicit 3D representations have been widely used in recent 3D learning approaches, none of these representations can fulfill all the desirable properties. In particular, point cloud and voxel representations struggle to capture the fine-scale shape details – often at the cost of high memory
∗Contributed equally.
†Corresponding author is Lin Gao (gaolin@ict.ac.cn). 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.
consumption. Mesh-based learning approaches typically rely on deforming a template model, lim-iting its scalability to handle arbitrary topologies. The advent of neural implicit function [44, 7, 37] have recently brought impressive advances to the state-of-the-art across a range of 3D modeling and reconstruction tasks. However, using only a global function for encoding the entirety of all shapes, the aforementioned methods often suffer from limited reconstruction accuracy and shape generality.
To overcome these limitations, follow-up works have proposed to decompose the 3D space into regular grid [27, 4], or local supporting regions [19], where each subdivided shape is approximated by a locally learned implicit function. The decomposition of scenes simplifies the shape priors that each local network has to learn, leading to higher reconstruction accuracy and efficiency. However, these approaches do not take into account the varying granularities of local geometry, resulting in two major shortcomings. Efficiency-wise, their memory usage grows cubically with the volume of the 3D scenes. Even a moderately dense decomposition could impose severe memory bottleneck.
Scalability-wise, the regular gridding has difficulty scaling to high resolutions, limiting its expres-siveness when dealing with intricate shapes with small and sharp geometric features (Figure 4).
We observe that most 3D shapes are typically consisting of large smooth regions and small-scale sharp features. In addition, the surface of interest often consumes only a small portion of the entire space, leading to an extremely sparse space occupancy. Based on these observations, we propose a novel 3D representation called
OctField, that introduces hierarchies to the or-ganization of local implicit functions to achieve better memory efficiency and stronger model-ing capacity. As shown in Figure 1, OctField leverages a hierarchical data structure, Octree, to adaptively subdivide the 3D space accord-ing to the surface occupancy and the richness of geometrical details.
In particular, regions enclosing intricate geometries will be further subdivided to allocate more implicit kernels for higher modeling accuracy. In contrast, we stop subdivision for octants containing smooth part geometry as a single implicit kernel would suf-fice for modeling. Further, we do not allocate any implicit functions in the unoccupied regions. Hence, OctField could obtain significantly higher representation accuracy with a slightly deeper octree subdivision, as the modeling capacity has been adaptively optimized to accommodate the varying granularity of surface details.
Figure 1: OctField utilizes an octree structure to achieve a hierarchical implicit representation, where part geometry enclosed by an octant is rep-resented by a local implicit function. OctField achieves an adaptive allocation of modeling ca-pacity according to the richness of surface geom-etry. In particular, intricate parts such as jet en-gines, tail-planes and the undercarriage are au-tomatically subdivided to engage more implicit kernels for higher modeling accuracy, while parts with regular shapes on the fuselage is encoded us-ing a coarser-level representation that suffices.
As the octree structure is discrete and non-differentiable, it is non-trivial to directly employ octree in a learning-based framework. We propose a novel hierarchical network that recursively encodes and decodes both octree structure and geometry features in a differentiable manner. Specifically, at the decoder side, we model the subdivision of octree cells as a probabilistic process to make the learning of octree structure differentiable. We employ a classifier to predict whether to subdivide current cell based on its enclosed geometry features. We validate the efficacy of our new representation in a variety of tasks on shape reconstruction and modeling. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of OctField over the state-of-the-art shape representations in terms of both shape quality and memory efficiency. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• A learnable hierarchical implicit representation for 3D learning, named OctField, that com-bines the state-of-the-art hierarchical data structure with local implicit functions.
• A novel hierarchical encoder-decoder network that models the construction of octree as a probabilistic process and is able to learn both discrete octree structure and surface geometry in a differentiable manner.
• We achieve significantly higher surface approximation accuracy with reduced memory cost in the 3D modeling related tasks by using our proposed representation. 2
2