Abstract
We consider the classical problem of ﬁnding the minimum feedback arc set on tournaments (MFAST). The problem is NP-hard in general and we study it for important classes of tournaments that arise naturally in the problem of learning to rank from pairwise comparisons. Speciﬁcally, we consider tournaments classes that arise out of parametric preference matrices that can lead to cyclic preference relations. We investigate their structural properties via forbidden sub tournament conﬁgurations. Towards this, we introduce Tournament Dimension - a combinato-rial parameter that characterizes the size of a forbidden conﬁguration for rank r tournament classes i.e., classes that arise out of pairwise preference matrices which lead to rank r skew-symmetric matrices under a suitable link function. Our main re-sult is a polynomial-time algorithm - Rank2Rank - that solves the MFAST problem for the rank 2 tournament class. This is achieved via a geometric characterization that relies on our explicit construction of a forbidden conﬁguration for this class.
Building on our understanding of the rank-2 tournament class, we propose a very general and ﬂexible parametric pairwise preference model called the local-global model which subsumes the popular Bradley-Terry-Luce/Thurstone classes to capture locally cyclic as well as globally acyclic preference relations. We develop a polynomial-time algorithm - BlockRank2Rank- to solve the MFAST problem on the associated Block-Rank 2 tournament class.
As an application, we study the problem of learning to rank from pairwise compar-isons under the proposed local-global preference model. Exploiting our structural characterization, we propose PairwiseBlockRank - a pairwise ranking algorithm for this class. We show sample complexity bounds of PairwiseBlockRank to learn a good ranking under the proposed model. Finally, we conduct experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets to show the efﬁcacy of the proposed algorithm. 1

Introduction
A tournament is a complete directed graph. Given a tournament T, the classical feedback arc set on tournament (MFAST) problem asks for the minimum number of edges that must be removed (or whose orientation reversed) in T to make it acyclic [3]. The problem is known to be NP-hard for general tournaments [6]. We investigate the MFAST problem for several classes of tournaments which naturally occur in learning to rank from pairwise comparisons. In particular, we wish to study the MFAST problem on tournament classes which arise out of parametric pairwise preference classes.
Popular parametric preference models such as the Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) [4; 17] and Thurstone models [25] give rise to acyclic tournament matrices for which the MFAST problem is trivial. Our
∗Cohesity, Inc, has neither endorsed nor sponsored this research or its publication in any way; the author’s research opinions and ﬁndings are his own. 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
Figure 1: Several tournaments that arise out of real world datasets exhibit cyclic structure. (Source: www.preflib.org). Figure shows six such examples in varied application domains. Except the Sushi
Preference Tournament, none of the others can be modelled using acyclic preference models like Bradley-Terry-Luce/Thurstone. The local-global model described in Section 6 and the associated Block- T n 2 class deﬁned in this paper induces all these ﬂexible tournament structures. tournaments
Figure 2:
Out of 290 real world from www.preflib.org, ﬁgure shows the fraction of tournaments that are acyclic and the fraction of cyclic tournaments that satisfy the Block-Rank 2 model we propose. goal is to identify and study non-trivial classes of parametric preference matrices which give rise to potentially cyclic tournaments. Cyclic tournaments arise naturally in several real world preference datasets. Figure 1 shows a few real world cyclic tournament structures and Figure 2 shows the fraction of tournaments out of 290 real world tournaments that are acyclic and those that are cyclic and can arise out of the models proposed in this paper. Clearly, simple models such as BTL/Thurstone are insufﬁcient to model these tournaments.
Every pairwise preference matrix P ∈ (0, 1)n×n can be associated to a tournament via a skew symmetric link function φ i.e, φ(P) is a skew symmetric matrix and the tournament T associated to P has an edge from i to j if and only if φ(Pij) > 0. While preference matrices themselves are always of high rank [11], several well studied pairwise preference classes give rise to skew symmetric matrices of low rank under a suitable link function. For example, the BTL model gives rise to a rank 2 skew symmetric matrix under the logit link whereas the Thurstone Model does so under a probit link [22]. It is important to understand the possible tournaments any parametric preference class can give rise to. Indeed, it might be natural and much easier for a modeller/domain expert to make a structural statement such as The class of tournaments of interest should contain cycles of length at most 4 as opposed to an algebraic statement like The class of tournaments should be associated with a preference matrix which on a skew symmetric transformation leads to a rank 8 matrix.
We study the structure of rank r tournament class i.e, tournaments which arise out of preference matrices that lead to some rank r matrix under a skew-symmetric transformation. This class can be interpreted as each node in the tournament having an embedding in Rr and the preference relation between nodes depends on a suitable notion of similarity between the embeddings (see Section 4 for details). It is known that such classes can model cyclic relations [22]. To investigate the MFAST problem for the rank r tournament classes, we ﬁrst structurally understand these tournament via the notion of forbidden conﬁgurations [8]. Forbidden conﬁgurations in tournaments have been studied in other non-parametric contexts. The simplest example is the class of acyclic tournaments which has the 3 cycle as a forbidden conﬁguration. A complicated forbidden conﬁguration class using Möbius ladders was studied in [8; 9]. In both these cases, the MFAST problem is poly-time solvable.
Our Contributions. Our ﬁrst contribution is to derive upper and lower bounds for the size of a forbidden conﬁguration for any rank r tournament class. We do this by introducing a novel combinatorial parameter that we call the Tournament Dimension. When rank r = 2, we completely characterize the associated tournament class by identifying the exact forbidden conﬁguration. We use this forbidden conﬁguration to understand the geometry of this tournament class and propose an algorithm (Rank2Rank) to solve the MFAST problem in polynomial time for this class of tournaments.
Our next contribution is to propose a ﬂexible class of tournaments called the Block Rank 2 class which builds on the rank 2 class. Tournaments in this class can arise from the local-global model - a general pairwise preference model that we propose. The model can capture locally cyclic relations as well as globally acyclic relations and is well suited for several practical applications including those in Figure 1. The model subsumes several popular pairwise ranking models including the BTL and 2
Thurstone models. We show that the MFAST problem on the associated Block Rank 2 tournament class is polynomial time solvable and propose an algorithm (BlockRank2Rank) for the problem.
Our third contribution is to study an application of our work to the problem of learning to rank from pairwise comparisons. We propose a matrix completion based algorithm called PairwiseBlockRank for this problem and derive sample complexity bounds for the same under the proposed local-global preference model. Finally, we evaluate our algorithms on real world and synthetic data-sets and show improved performance over several existing algorithms. 2