Abstract
Recently, the information-theoretical framework has been proven to be able to obtain non-vacuous generalization bounds for large models trained by Stochastic
Gradient Langevin Dynamics (SGLD) with isotropic noise. In this paper, we opti-mize the information-theoretical generalization bound by manipulating the noise structure in SGLD. We prove that with constraint to guarantee low empirical risk, the optimal noise covariance is the square root of the expected gradient covariance if both the prior and the posterior are jointly optimized. This validates that the optimal noise is quite close to the empirical gradient covariance. Technically, we develop a new information-theoretical bound that enables such an optimization anal-ysis. We then apply matrix analysis to derive the form of optimal noise covariance.
Presented constraint and results are validated by the empirical observations. 1

Introduction
Generalization ability is one of the core questions in learning theory [4], but remains unclear for deep learning models [17, 38]. Existing generalization bounds based on the capacity control become vacuous for practical deep learning models due to the over-parameterization property [1, 26, 39].
From the information theoretical perspective, recent works [30, 37] bound the generalization error by the mutual information between the dataset and the learned parameters. This result reveals that good generalization occurs when the learned parameters do not depend on a specific dataset too much, which is intuitively reasonable and closely related with the idea of algorithm stability
[6, 15, 19, 24, 20] and differential privacy [8, 10]. Meanwhile, based on information-theoretic metrics, one can analyze general classes of updates and models, e.g., stochastic iterative algorithms for non-convex objectives, hence applicable to deep learning. It has been shown that the information theoretical bounds are non-vacuous and closely related with the real generalization error even in deep learning [14, 26, 9, 39].
Notably, the information theoretical bound is realized in [28] via decomposing the mutual information across iterations. This framework can perform a step-wise analysis of Stochastic Gradient Langevin
Dynamics (SGLD) [33, 29], by evaluating the mutual information conditional on the previous learned
∗Corresponding Author 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
parameters at each step. We note that the noise added in SGLD is critical for both the mutual information evaluation and the empirical risk minimization. Most existing work focus on SGLD with constant and isotropic noise covariance [22, 25, 14] due to the technical difficulty. However, it is observed that the test accuracy of SGLD with isotropic noise has a considerable gap compared to that of the widely-used Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) [40]. This empirical gap motivates us to consider the following question:
Can we find the optimal noise added in SGLD in terms of generalization?
An affirmative answer will lead to an algorithm imitating SGD better, which helps us to better understand the generalization behavior of SGD.
Specifically, we propose to optimize the structure of the noise in SGLD such that the generalization bound is minimized while a low empirical risk is guaranteed. To this end, we first show that the trace of the noise covariance in SGLD is a valid constraint that governs the empirical risk behavior both theoretically and empirically. Then we devise a new information theoretical generalization bound that are parallel to those bounds in [25], but facilitate the derivation of the optimal noise. With these technical preparations, we prove that when jointly optimizing both the prior and the posterior, the optimal noise covariance is the square root of the expected gradient covariance, i.e., their eigenvectors are the same and the corresponding eigenvalues of the former are the square root of the latter, and the optimal prior recovers the prior in [25]. This indicates the optimal noise covariance of SGLD would be quite close to the empirical gradient covariance, i.e., the noise covariance of SGD, because of the concentration of measure.
Our result lends support to the belief that the noise introduced by Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) is superior to the isotropic noise, which has been widely observed [18, 36, 40, 38]. As an illustrative example, we plot the generalization errors of SGD, SGLD with the isotropic noise and SGLD with the optimal noise in Figure 1, where their training curves behave almost the same (do not show here).
We can see the optimal noise captures the behavior of SGD much better than the isotropic noise.
Specifically, our contribution can be summarized as follows: 1. We formulate a problem of finding the optimal noise covari-ance by optimizing an information-theoretical bound; 2. We develop a new information-theoretical bound to facilitate the analysis of the above optimization problem; 3. We obtain the optimal structure of the noise covariances, and demonstrate the similarity to empirical/expected gradient covariance; 1.1