Abstract
The design of optimal auctions is a problem of interest in economics, game the-ory, and computer science. Despite decades of effort, strategyproof, revenue-maximizing auction designs are still not known outside of restricted settings.
However, recent methods using deep learning have shown some success in approxi-mating optimal auctions, recovering several known solutions and outperforming strong baselines when optimal auctions are not known. In addition to maximiz-ing revenue, auction mechanisms may also seek to encourage socially desirable constraints such as allocation fairness or diversity. However, these philosophical notions neither have standardization nor do they have widely accepted formal deﬁnitions. In this paper, we propose PreferenceNet, an extension of existing neural-network-based auction mechanisms to encode constraints using (potentially human-provided) exemplars of desirable allocations. In addition, we introduce a new metric to evaluate an auction allocations’ adherence to such socially desirable constraints and demonstrate that our proposed method is competitive with current state-of-the-art neural-network based auction designs. We validate our approach through human subject research and show that we are able to effectively capture real human preferences. Our code is available on GitHub. 1

Introduction
Auctions are an essential tool in many marketplaces, including those in electricity [8], advertising
[14], and telecommunications [9, 26]. The design of auctions with desirable properties is thus an important theoretical and practical problem. A typical assumption is that bidders may choose to bid strategically and will successfully anticipate the behavior of other bidders. This results in a potentially complicated Bayes-Nash equilibrium which may be difﬁcult to predict. To evade this problem, a common requirement is that an auction should be strategyproof (i.e. bidders should be incentivized to truthfully share their valuations regardless of other bidders’ actions).
If the goal of an auction is to maximize the total welfare of all participants, the Vickrey-Clarke-Groves (VCG) mechanism is both strategyproof and welfare-maximizing [40, 7, 20]. Intuitively, in many cases the VCG mechanism corresponds to a second-price auction. If the goal is to maximize the revenue gained, the problem is more challenging. Myerson’s work completely characterizes strategyproof, revenue-maximizing auctions for a single item [29]. Beyond this case, results are more limited. Some results are known for the “multiple-good monopolist” problem, in which the auctioneer sells multiple items to a single bidder [11, 12, 24, 31, 28, 21, 18]. In addition, designing auctions for the related but weaker notion of Bayes-Nash incentive compatibility is reasonably well understood [2, 3, 4].
There has been signiﬁcant difﬁculty in designing strategyproof auctions involving multiple items and multiple bidders. [41] shares signiﬁcant, but limited results which solve the case in which items
* The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally to this work. 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
may have at most 2 values. Due to the apparent difﬁculty of analytically designing strategyproof, revenue maximizing auctions, recent methods instead approximate optimal auctions using machine learning approaches [13, 10, 19, 25, 15, 33, 32]. [37] proposes an method which guarantees exact strategyproofness in the single-agent setting. [39, 1] also use neural networks in the design of auctions. These methods primarily focus on standard mechanism design goals of revenue or welfare maximization, but these may not be the only goals of an auction. An auction might be conducted for public goods (i.e. electromagnetic spectrum distribution [9]), where the auctioneer must consider the effect not only on the auctioneer and bidders but on third-parties as well [30]. In other cases, such as auctions involving job or credit advertisements, it might be necessary to additionally constrain the auction mechanism to ensure fairness with respect to protected characteristics [23, 6]. Recent work has considered the problem of determining revenue-maximizing, strategyproof, fair auctions, either from a speciﬁc class [5] or with a general neural network approach [25].
The underlying notions of “fairness” used in these papers (e.g. total-variation fairness [23]) are defensible but somewhat arbitrary – they are attempts to formally capture human intuition. It might instead be better to attempt to capture, from data, human intuitions about fairness or other ethical requirements that are not explicitly deﬁned [38, 16].
In this paper, we introduce PreferenceNet, an extension to RegretNet that directly encodes socially de-sirable constraints from data, and captures noisy human preferences. We are motivated by advertising auctions where the allocations of the auction mechanism must satisfy human preference constraints alongside the typical goals of strategyproofness and revenue maximization. We conduct a number of experiments using synthetic data (as is typical for neural network based auction mechanisms
[13]) and evaluate our method on different auction settings and fairness constraints. We show that
PreferenceNet is able to effectively capture each fairness constraint and matches the performance of standard approaches. We also conduct two surveys to further study human preferences. In the
ﬁrst survey (n=140), when given a speciﬁc deﬁnition of fairness, we ask participants to determine if a given auction setting is fair in order to test the noise in human judgements. In the second survey (n=345), we elicit judgements of pairwise comparisons of two auction settings to determine preferences without priming the participants with any particular deﬁnition of fairness. We train
PreferenceNet on these data and show that our approach can capture nuanced human preferences in auction design. 2