Abstract
We study prior-independent dynamic auction design with production costs for a value-maximizing buyer, a paradigm that is becoming prevalent recently following the development of automatic bidding algorithms in advertising platforms. In contrast to a utility-maximizing buyer, who maximizes the difference between her total value and total payment, a value-maximizing buyer aims to maximize her total value subject to a return on investment (ROI) constraint. Our main result is a dynamic mechanism with regret ˜O(T 2/3), where T is the time horizon, against the
ﬁrst-best benchmark, i.e., the maximum amount of revenue the seller can extract assuming all values of the buyer are publicly known. 1

Introduction
Automatic bidding has become one of the main options for advertisers to buy advertisement op-portunities in the online advertising market [Dolan, 2020]. The prevalence of automatic bidding is partly driven by the fact that it signiﬁcantly simpliﬁes the interaction between the advertisers and the advertising platform. Nowadays, millions of auctions are conducted in any given day while the competitive landscape could be evolving over time and becoming vastly different across auctions.
Therefore, it is difﬁcult for the advertisers to reason about its dynamics, let alone optimizing their bids for each auction separately. Instead of soliciting for ﬁne-grained bids for different auctions they participate in, the automatic bidding product only asks the advertisers to provide high-level objectives and constraints. With provided high-level information, the automatic bidding product bids on behalf of the advertisers to optimize the objectives while respecting the constraints. While there are many different types of automatic bidding produces, a well-adopted product bids to maximize the number of acquisitions subject to a constraint on the advertiser-speciﬁed return on investment (ROI) constraint, i.e., a target ratio between the advertiser’s return and her advertising spend [Facebook, 2021, Google, 2021]. To bid on behalf of the advertiser to maximize the number of acquisitions, the automatic bidding products can invoke sophisticated prediction algorithms to predict the acquisition rate. These prediction algorithms have the beneﬁt of being trained with long periods of data to have a good generalization [Juan et al., 2016, McMahan et al., 2013, Zhou et al., 2018]. In this way, the advertiser can only focus on designing their high-level objectives and specifying their constraints, while leaving the complicated bidding part to the automatic bidding products.
The emergence of automatic bidding products opens up the opportunities for novel design of dynamic auction mechanisms, as classic mechanisms are heavily specialized for utility-maximizing bidders, the de facto paradigm in economic theory, which maximize the difference between their total value and total payment [Edelman et al., 2007, Myerson, 1981]. In contrast, automated bidders behave very differently in a way such that the payment is not directly involved in their objectives; and instead, the payment indirectly appears in the ROI constraints while the objectives aim to maximize the total value only. Therefore, classic auction design tailored for utility-maximizing bidders may not continue to perform well in an automatic bidding environment. Furthermore, recent results demonstrate that 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
for single-slot auctions, neither welfare nor revenue achieved by an incentive-compatible auction (for utility-maximizing bidders, e.g., second-price auctions) at any reasonable equilibrium can be larger than 1/2 of the optimum [Aggarwal et al., 2019, Deng et al., 2021]. Recently, Balseiro et al. [2021] initiated the study of characterizing single-stage revenue-optimal auctions for automated bidders under various information structures. Surprisingly, they show that in a Bayesian setting in which the advertiser’ value is private and the target ratio in the ROI constraint is public, a payment-scaled second-price auction can achieve ﬁrst-best revenue, i.e., the revenue when all information is public.
For a comparison, recall that ﬁrst-best revenue is in general not achievable against utility-maximizing bidders as demonstrated by the Myerson’s auction [Myerson, 1981]. However, the assumption on perfect knowledge of the prior distribution on the advertiser’s values limits the application of their payment-scaled second-price auction, as the seller usually needs to learn the distribution via repeated interactions with the advertiser. 1.1 Our results
In this paper, we aim to relax such an assumption by studying the problem of designing prior-independent dynamic mechanisms against a single automated bidder. In line with the literature [Amin et al., 2013], we consider a setting of repeated auctions with multiple stages against an impatient automated bidder whose valuations are drawn identically and independently across stages. Moreover, we assume the automated bidder bids in a way to satisfy her ex-ante ROI constraint per stage, consistent with the setup in [Balseiro et al., 2021]. In practice, the auction parameters are updated infrequently (e.g., once per day) and the automated bidders participate in multiple repeated auctions in a stage, i.e., the period between two consecutive updates. For each stage, the ROI constraints need to be satisﬁed on average over many auctions that the bidders participate in.
Our main result is a novel dynamic mechanism achieving ˜O(T 2/3) regret against a strategic automated bidder, where T is the time horizon. Our dynamic mechanism adopts the explore-and-exploit scheme by ﬁrst estimating the bidder’s value distribution. We then offer a robust version of the single-stage revenue-optimal mechanism to extract the revenue. A cornerstone of our dynamic mechanism in the exploration phase is a novel prior-independent single-stage mechanism that is incentive-compatible for automated bidders. This mechanism forces the bidder to make a trade-off between her future gain from misreporting her values and her immediate loss, leading to a Wasserstein distance bound on the magnitude of misreporting from the automated bidder — which is precisely the form of error that our exploitation mechanisms are robust against. 1.2