Abstract
Learning an unknown n-qubit quantum state ρ is a fundamental challenge in quan-tum computing. Information-theoretically, it is known that tomography requires exponential in n many copies of ρ to estimate its entries. Motivated by learning the-ory, Aaronson et al. introduced many (weaker) learning models: the PAC model of learning states (Proc. of Royal Society A’07), shadow tomography (STOC’18) for learning “shadows" of a state, a model that also requires learners to be differentially private (STOC’19) and the online model of learning states (NeurIPS’18). In these models it was shown that ρ can be learned “approximately" using linear in n many copies of ρ. But is there any relationship between these models? In this paper we prove a sequence of (information-theoretic) implications from differentially-private
PAC learning to online learning and then to quantum stability. Our main result generalizes the recent work of Bun, Livni and Moran (Journal of the ACM’21) who showed that ﬁnite Littlestone dimension (of Boolean-valued concept classes) implies PAC learnability in the (approximate) differentially private (DP) setting.
We ﬁrst extend their work to the real-valued setting, and further extend to the setting of learning quantum states. Key to our results is our generic quantum online learner, Robust Standard Optimal Algorithm (RSOA), which is robust to adversarial imprecision. We then show information-theoretic equivalences between
DP learning quantum states in the PAC model, learnability of quantum states in the one-way communication model, online learning of quantum states, quantum stability, various combinatorial parameters and give further applications to gentle shadow tomography and noisy quantum state learning. 1

Introduction
Learning an unknown quantum state ρ, given copies of the state is a fundamental task in quantum computing, often referred to as tomography. Tomography is of great practical interest since it helps in tasks such as verifying entanglement, understanding correlations, and is useful for calibrating, understanding and controlling noise in quantum devices. In the last few years, questions about the fundamental limits of this task have gained a lot of theoretical attention: how many copies of an n-qubit quantum state ρ are required to estimate the density matrix of ρ up to small error? Recent
∗https://stanford.edu/∼yquek 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
breakthrough results of [1, 2, 3] showed that Θ(22n/ε2) copies of ρ are necessary and sufﬁcient to learn ρ up to trace distance ε. Unfortunately, this exponential scaling in complexity hampers practical applications of tomography; the best known experimental implementation of full-state quantum tomography has been for a 10-qubit quantum state [4].
Simultaneously, the use of machine learning for quantum states has gained lot of traction in quantum computing. In this area, the goal is to use heuristics to learn an unknown quantum state, often with the motivation of physical implementation. Provable results in this area are very few, but interest is widespread due to the number of emerging quantum hardware devices. Given the fundamental importance of tomography and the natural connection to learning, Aaronson [5] formally deﬁned a variant of tomography: PAC learning quantum states. This problem brings together two ripe exciting topics: classical machine learning and quantum computing. Following his work, there have been a few other papers that have introduced models of learning quantum states with various constraints.
In this work, our main contribution is to show implications between several seemingly different quantum learning models. The main technicality is extending known results in classical learning theory from Boolean functions to real-valued functions with noisy labels – a setting motivated by learning quantum states, but with potential extensions to learning other physical systems (e.g. [6]).
Along the way we also show how certain implications that hold for classical Boolean functions do not hold true in the real-valued setting (which could be of independent classical interest). See Figure 1 for a summary of our results. 1.1