Abstract
In settings ranging from weather forecasts to political prognostications to ﬁnancial projections, probability estimates of future binary outcomes often evolve over time. For example, the estimated likelihood of rain on a speciﬁc day changes by the hour as new information becomes available. Given a collection of such probability paths, we introduce a Bayesian framework—which we call the Gaussian latent information martingale, or GLIM—for modeling the structure of dynamic predictions over time. Suppose, for example, that the likelihood of rain in a week is 50%, and consider two hypothetical scenarios. In the ﬁrst, one expects the forecast to be equally likely to become either 25% or 75% tomorrow; in the second, one expects the forecast to stay constant for the next several days. A time-sensitive decision-maker might select a course of action immediately in the latter scenario, but may postpone their decision in the former, knowing that new information is imminent. We model these trajectories by assuming predictions update according to a latent process of information ﬂow, which is inferred from historical data.
In contrast to general methods for time series analysis, this approach preserves important properties of probability paths such as the martingale structure and appropriate amount of volatility and better quantiﬁes future uncertainties around probability paths. We show that GLIM outperforms three popular baseline methods, producing better estimated posterior probability path distributions measured by three different metrics. By elucidating the dynamic structure of predictions over time, we hope to help individuals make more informed choices. 1

Introduction
Probabilistic predictions of future binary outcomes are ubiquitous in real-world statistical and machine learning problems, ranging from election modeling [Erikson and Wlezien, 2012, Shirani-Mehr et al., 2018, Gelman et al., 2020] to weather forecasting [Esteves et al., 2019] to assessing mortality risk [Teres et al., 1987, Malmberg et al., 1997, Martinez-Alario et al., 1999, Yan et al., 2020] to risk assessment tools in criminal justice applications [Chouldechova, 2017, Lin et al., 2020]. Often such probabilistic predictions are not static, but rather evolve over time as more information becomes available. For instance, the estimated likelihood a candidate wins an election updates with every new poll that is conducted, and the estimated chance of rain on a given future day changes by the hour as new meteorological data become available.
In many of these domains, a large body of work aims to provide accurate, real-time forecasts that account for the very latest information. However, signiﬁcantly less attention has been paid to understanding how the predictions themselves evolve over time. If there’s a 35% chance of rain one week from now, what can we say about tomorrow’s prediction of rain on that same day? In expectation, tomorrow’s prediction must be the same as today’s—if it were not, we would be better
∗Research was conducted when the author was at Stanford University. 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
Figure 1: Dynamic forecasts of rainfall across several Australian cities during the summer and winter, starting one week before the target date. All forecasts initially indicate an approximately 35% chance of rain. But the forecast trajectories—which we call probability paths—have higher volatility in the summer than in the winter. off updating today’s prediction to match our expectation of tomorrow’s forecast. In other words, such sequence of probabilistic predictions should be a martingale [Augenblick and Rabin, 2021, Foster and Stine, 2021, Gelman et al., 2020, Taleb et al., 2019, Taleb, 2018, Ely et al., 2015]. But aside from satisfying this martingale property, the forecast trajectories can vary widely from one setting to the next.
Consider, for example, the collection of dynamic weather forecasts presented in Figure 1. The plot shows the evolution of 7-day precipitation predictions for a set of Australian cities [Williams, 2011,
Young and Young, 2018], where we have disaggregated the predictions by season (summer or winter) and restricted to those instances for which the 7-day forecast starts at approximately 35%. As is visually apparent, the mean prediction on any later day is still approximately 35%, as expected. But the summer forecasts are considerable more volatile than those in the winter. In the winter months (June–August), the prediction is unlikely to change substantially until immediately before the target date. In contrast, in the summer months (December–February), the prediction is likely to oscillate considerably—either up or down—with each passing day.
These patterns have immediate consequences for time-sensitive decision makers [Ferguson, 2004,
Tsitsiklis and Van Roy, 1999, Chow and Robbins, 1963]. As a simple example, suppose one is planning a weekend picnic, with a preference both for sunshine and for sending out invitations as soon as possible. If one knows that a weather forecast is unlikely to change in the immediate future, one might opt to simply send out the invitations and hope for the best. Alternatively, knowing that more information is imminent—as reﬂected by forecasts that are likely to soon change—one might choose to wait another day before deciding to hold the party.
In this paper, we develop a Bayesian framework to investigate—and predict—the structure of dynamic probabilistic forecasts: the Gaussian latent information martingale, or GLIM. In contrast to existing techniques for time-series modeling, our approach is tailored to the speciﬁc properties of evolving probabilistic forecasts, which we call probability paths2. Most importantly, our approach satisﬁes the martingale property described above, with the expected value of future predictions along the path equal to the current prediction. Our model is trained directly on historical paths, and learns the heterogeneous, covariate-dependent structure of forecasts. As a result, it is rich enough to predict the type of structure illustrated in Figure 1. We show that this approach often outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods for quantifying uncertainty for evolving time series forecast, ostensibly because past general-purpose methods do not leverage the idiosyncratic properties of probability paths. As real-time forecasting becomes increasingly popular, we hope this work helps researchers and decision makers investigate and act on these dynamic predictions. 2Also known as stream of beliefs, streamﬂow forecast, or evolution of forecasts under different contexts. 2
2