Abstract
The study of Variational Quantum Eigensolvers (VQEs) has been in the spotlight in recent times as they may lead to real-world applications of near-term quan-tum devices. However, their performance depends on the structure of the used variational ansatz, which requires balancing the depth and expressivity of the cor-responding circuit. At the same time, near-term restrictions limit the depth of the circuit we can expect to run. Thus, the optimization of the VQE ansatz requires maximizing the expressivity of the circuit while maintaining low depth. In re-cent years, various methods for VQE structure optimization have been introduced but the capacities of machine learning to aid with this problem have not yet been extensively investigated. In this work, we propose a reinforcement learning algo-rithm that autonomously explores the space of possible ansatzes, identifying eco-nomic circuits which still yield accurate ground energy estimates. The algorithm uses a feedback-driven curriculum learning method that autonomously adapts the complexity of the learning problem to the current performance of the learning al-gorithm and it incrementally improves the accuracy of the result while minimizing the circuit depth. We showcase the performance of our algorithm on the problem of estimating the ground-state energy of lithium hydride (LiH) in various conﬁg-urations. In this well-known benchmark problem, we achieve chemical accuracy and state-of-the-art results in terms of circuit depth. 1

Introduction
As we are entering the so-called Noisy Intermediate Scale Quantum (NISQ) [1] technology era, the search for more suitable algorithms under NISQ restrictions is becoming ever more important. A truly compatible NISQ application must ﬁrst be amenable to architecture constraints and size limits.
Furthermore, to minimize the adverse effects of gate errors and decoherence, it is important that the circuits are as gate-frugal and as shallow as possible. 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
Perhaps the most promising classes of such algorithms are based on variational circuit methods, with which we have high expectations when applied to problems in quantum chemistry. A key problem in this ﬁeld is the computing of ground state energies and low energy properties of chemical systems (the chemical structure problem). This problem is believed to be intractable in general, yet the quantum Variational Quantum Eigensolver (VQE) [2] algorithm can provide solutions in regimes which lie beyond the reach of classical algorithms, while maintaining NISQ-friendly properties [3, 4].
VQE is a hybrid quantum-classical algorithm, where a parametrized quantum state is prepared on a quantum computer, the parameters of which are selected using classical optimization methods.
The objective is to prepare the state given Hamiltonian H by the variational principle (cid:105)
ψ((cid:126)θ)
| which can be used to approximate the ground state of a
Emin ( min (cid:126)θ
ψ((cid:126)θ) (cid:104)
H
|
ψ((cid:126)θ)
|
) , (cid:105)
≤ (1) where Emin is the true ground state energy of H. The parametrized state is prepared by applying
U ((cid:126)θ), which is a parametrized quantum circuit (typically with a ﬁxed architecture), where the angles (cid:126)θ = (θ1...θn) specify the rotation angles of the local unitary rotations present in the circuit. This circuit, known as the ansatz is applied to an initial state
, usually chosen to be the ﬁducial “all (cid:105)
= U ((cid:126)θ) 00...0
, to prepare the state zero” state (cid:105)
ψ((cid:126)θ) (cid:105)
It is well established that the structure of the ansatz can dramatically inﬂuence the VQE’s perfor-mance [4, 5], as the closeness of the estimated ground state to the true one depends on the state manifold accessible by the ansatz. Thus ﬁnding new architecture construction methods could lead to breakthroughs in quantum variational methods for chemistry (e.g. for strongly-correlated sys-tems, for which standard ansatzes might fail), but also in other domains which utilize variational circuits such as machine learning and optimization [6, 7, 8, 9].
ψ0
. (cid:105)
|
ψ0
|
|
|
Currently, the foremost ansatzes fall primarily in two classes: chemistry-inspired (e.g. the unitary coupled-cluster ansatz [2, 10]) and hardware-inspired (e.g. the hardware efﬁcient ansatz [11]). Ar-chitectures from both of these classes entail using a ﬁxed architecture [2, 10, 11, 12] determining the unitary U ((cid:126)θ), and hence the corresponding ansatz. The ansatz circuit is then usually decomposed
[0, 2π]n to into two-qubit CNOT and one-qubit rotation gates parametrized by (θ1, θ2, . . . , θn) be optimized by a classical subroutine. However, the architecture itself can also be optimized. This results in a hard structure optimization problem, as it is a combinatorial optimization problem that must balance two competing factors. On the one hand, the ansatz needs to be expressive enough to guarantee a good approximation of the ground state energy. On the other hand, the depth and size of the circuit need to be controlled in order for the latter to be compatible with NISQ restrictions.
∈
Contributions
In this work, we propose a general optimization procedure for VQE based on deep reinforcement learning (RL) which is designed to yield quantum circuits that are both gate and depth-efﬁcient. We supplement this RL approach with curriculum learning [13, 14], a powerful machine learning method for solving complex problems by leveraging the solutions of previously-solved simpler instances. Speciﬁcally, we introduce a feedback-driven curriculum learning method that autonomously adapts the complexity of the learning problem to the current performance of the learning algorithm. We apply our architecture to the well-established benchmarking problem of
ﬁnding the ground state energy of the LiH molecule [15, 3] and observe chemical accuracy while maintaining a low-depth quantum circuit and achieving state-of-the-art results in terms of gate efﬁ-ciency. Apart from ground state estimation, the proposed method has a wider range of applications, the algorithm can be applied to any variational-circuit-based algorithm.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we discuss the related works. In Section 3, we introduce our method with simplistic assumptions about the exact value of the ground state energy. At the end of this section, we provide a method circumventing this unrealistic requirement.
As an initial proof-of-concept, in Section 4, we present the results assuming access to the exact value of energy. In Section 5, we provide the results for the full method that utilizes a rough proxy of energy obtained with classical methods. We conclude the paper with a discussion of possible future directions. 2
2