Abstract
Studies on self-supervised visual representation learning (SSL) improve encoder backbones to discriminate training samples without labels. While CNN encoders via SSL achieve comparable recognition performance to those via supervised learn-ing, their network attention is under-explored for further improvement. Motivated by the transformers that explore visual attention effectively in recognition scenarios, we propose a CNN Attention REvitalization (CARE) framework to train attentive
CNN encoders guided by transformers in SSL. The proposed CARE framework consists of a CNN stream (C-stream) and a transformer stream (T-stream), where each stream contains two branches. C-stream follows an existing SSL framework with two CNN encoders, two projectors, and a predictor. T-stream contains two transformers, two projectors, and a predictor. T-stream connects to CNN encoders and is in parallel to the remaining C-Stream. During training, we perform SSL in both streams simultaneously and use the T-stream output to supervise C-stream.
The features from CNN encoders are modulated in T-stream for visual attention enhancement and become suitable for the SSL scenario. We use these modulated features to supervise C-stream for learning attentive CNN encoders. To this end, we revitalize CNN attention by using transformers as guidance. Experiments on sev-eral standard visual recognition benchmarks, including image classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation, show that the proposed CARE framework improves CNN encoder backbones to the state-of-the-art performance. 1

Introduction
Learning visual features effectively has a profound influence on the recognition performance [5, 53].
Upon handling large-scale natural images, self-supervised visual representation learning benefits downstream recognition tasks via pretext feature training. Existing SSL methods typically leverage two branches to measure the similarity between different view representations derived from the same input image. By maximizing the similarity between the correlated views within one image (e.g.,
BYOL [24], SimSiam [14] and Barlow Twins [73]), or minimizing the similarity between views from different images (e.g., MoCo [27] and SimCLR [12]), these methods are shown to be effective towards learning self-supervised visual representations.
SSL evolves concurrently with the transformer. Debuting at natural language processing [62, 17], transformers have shown their advantages to process large-scale visual data since ViT [19]. The encoder-decoder architecture in this vision transformer consistently explores global attention without convolution. This architecture is shown effective for visual recognition with [7, 76, 54] or without
CNN integration [38, 21]. Inspired by these achievements via supervised learning, studies [15, 10, 4, 71] arise recently to train transformers in a self-supervised manner. These methods maintain most of
∗Y. Song is the corresponding author. The code is available at https://github.com/ChongjianGE/CARE 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
Figure 1: SSL framework overview. The solid lines indicate network pipeline, and the dash lines indicate network updates. MoCo V3 [15] explores visual attention by explicitly taking a vision transformer as encoder, while SimCLR [12] and BYOL [24] do not learn an attentive CNN encoder.
Our CARE framework consists of a C-stream and a T-stream to explore visual attention in CNN encoders with transformer supervision. Note that only target CNN encoder (i.e., CNN1) is preserved after pre-training for downstream evaluation. We do not show projectors in (b) and (d) for simplicity. the SSL pipeline (i.e., encoder, projector, and predictor) utilized for training CNN encoders. Without significant framework alteration, original SSL methods for CNN encoders can be adapted to train transformer encoders and achieve favorable performance.
The success of using transformer encoders indicates that visual attention benefits encoder backbones in SSL. On the other hand, in supervised learning, CNN attention is usually developed via network supervision [47]. However, we observe that existing SSL methods do not incorporate visual attention within CNN encoders. This motivates us to explore CNN attention in SSL. We expect CNN encoders to maintain similar visual attention to transformers for recognition performance improvement with lower computational complexity and less memory consumption.
In this paper, we propose a CNN Attention REvitalization framework (CARE) to make CNN encoder attentive via transformer guidance. Fig. 1 (d) shows an intuitive illustration of CARE and compares it with other state-of-the-art SSL frameworks. There are two streams (i.e., C-stream and
T-stream) in CARE where each stream contains two branches. C-stream is similar to existing SSL frameworks with two CNN encoders, two projectors, and one predictor. T-stream consists of two transformers, two projectors, and one predictor. T-stream takes CNN encoder features as input and improves feature attention via transformers. During the training process, we perform SSL in both streams simultaneously and use the T-stream output to supervise C-stream. The self-supervised learning in T-stream ensures attentive features produced by transformers are suitable for this SSL scenario. Meanwhile, we use the attention supervision on C-stream. This supervision enables both
C-stream and T-stream to produce similar features. The feature representation of CNN encoders is improved by visual attention from transformers. As a result, the pre-trained CNN encoder produces attentive features, which benefits downstream recognition scenarios. Experiments on standard image classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation benchmarks show that the proposed CARE framework improves prevalent CNN encoder backbones to the state-of-the-art performance. 2