Abstract
We study the problem of learning revenue-optimal multi-bidder auctions from samples when the samples of bidders’ valuations can be adversarially corrupted or drawn from distributions that are adversarially perturbed. First, we prove tight upper bounds on the revenue we can obtain with a corrupted distribution under a population model, for both regular valuation distributions and distributions with monotone hazard rate (MHR). We then propose new algorithms that, given only an “approximate distribution” for the bidder’s valuation, can learn a mechanism whose revenue is nearly optimal simultaneously for all “true distributions” that are α-close to the original distribution in Kolmogorov-Smirnov distance. The proposed algorithms operate beyond the setting of bounded distributions that have been studied in prior works, and are guaranteed to obtain a fraction 1 − O(α) of the optimal revenue under the true distribution when the distributions are MHR.
α) of the optimal
Moreover, they are guaranteed to yield at least a fraction 1 − O( revenue when the distributions are regular. We prove that these upper bounds cannot be further improved, by providing matching lower bounds. Lastly, we derive sample complexity upper bounds for learning a near-optimal auction for both MHR and regular distributions.
√ 1

Introduction
Optimal auctions play a crucial role in economic theory, with a wide range of applications across various industries, public sectors, and online platforms [Myerson, 1981, Bykowsky et al., 2000, Roth and Ockenfels, 2002, Klemperer, 2002, Milgrom and Milgrom, 2004, Lahaie et al., 2007]. In such auctions, pricing mechanisms need to be determined by the auction designer so as to satisfy various desired goals, such as revenue maximization and incentive compatibility. Often this determination is made based on information about the buyers that is assumed to be available a priori. For example, in a standard valuation model, each bidder has a valuation over the available items, and if the sellers knows the distribution of these valuations, they could design an optimal auction which maximizes the revenue.
Arguably the fundamental difﬁculty in the design of optimal auctions is that real valuations are private and unknown to the auction designer. Consider speciﬁcally the problem of selling one item to multiple buyers. Suppose that we model the buyers’ valuations as arising as independent draws from buyer-speciﬁc prior distributions. In this scenario, what is the optimal mechanism in terms of the expected revenue? This problem was solved by Myerson [1981] through a characterization of virtual value functions. In particular, we can deﬁne a virtual value function of each buyer based on their 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
prior distributions. An optimal auction then lets the buyer with the largest non-negative virtual value win the item, and charges the winner a price that equals the threshold value above which she wins.1
Unfortunately, there is a further fundamental challenge in deploying these theoretical results in practice, which is that in real-world settings the auction designer may not even know the prior distributions on valuations. Instead, what the designer might hope for is that there is a stream of previous transactions, or some other relevant auxiliary data, that is helpful in inferring the buyers’ private distributions. This perspective has motivated an active recent literature learning optimal auctions from samples [Cole and Roughgarden, 2014, Devanur et al., 2016, Morgenstern and
Roughgarden, 2015, 2016, Syrgkanis, 2017, Dudík et al., 2017, Gonczarowski and Nisan, 2017, Huang et al., 2018, Roughgarden and Schrijvers, 2016, Balcan et al., 2018, Guo et al., 2019, Roughgarden and Wang, 2019, Gonczarowski and Weinberg, 2021]. In this line of work, the central question is: suppose we are only able to access the prior distributions in the form of independent samples, how many samples are sufﬁcient and necessary for ﬁnding an approximately optimal auction?
While this merging of mechanism design and learning theory is appealing, a further concern arises.
Given the potentially adversarial setting of auction design, do we really believe that the data that we observe are drawn in accord with our assumptions? More concretely, is the learning of optimal auctions robust to adversarial corruptions of the samples? This problem is arguably at the core of what it means to learn an optimal auction. It is a challenging problem; indeed, as we show in
Counterexample 1 in Section 4, auction designs that are optimal in the absence of corruptions can become arbitrarily bad even if a small portion of the samples are corrupted. Building on earlier work by Cai and Daskalakis [2017] and Brustle et al. [2020], we tackle a key open problem—what is the best approximation to the optimal revenue for arbitrary levels of corruption for distributions with unbounded support? And what is the mechanism that achieves it?
In summary, in this work we explore the problem of the robust learning of optimal auctions, where the samples of bidders’ valuations are subject to corruption and their support is unbounded. In particular, we consider having access to samples that are drawn from some distribution ˜D which is within a
Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) distance α of the true distribution D∗. Denote OPT as the maximum revenue we can achieve under the true valuation distributions. Our goal is to design mechanisms that are guaranteed to achieve a revenue of at least (1 − ρ(α)) · OPT for the smallest possible error ρ(α) and with the use of a minimal number of samples. 1.1 Our results
We study the problem of learning revenue-optimal multi-bidder auctions from samples when the samples of bidders’ valuations can be adversarially corrupted or drawn from distributions that are adversarially perturbed. We summarize our main results as follows: 1. We derive tight upper bounds on the revenue we can obtain with a corrupted distribution under a population model. For distributions with monotone hazard rate (MHR), and with total corruption α, we obtain an approximation ratio of 1 − O(α) compared to the optimal revenue under the true distribution (see Theorem 3.6). For regular valuation distributions,
α) (see Theorem 3.8). where for total corruption α, we get an approximation ratio of 1 − O( 2. To achieve these upper bounds, we propose a new theoretical algorithm for the population model (see Algorithm 1) that, given only an “approximate distribution” for the bidder’s valuation, can learn a mechanism whose revenue is nearly optimal simultaneously for all “true distributions” that are α-close to the given distribution in Kolmogorov-Smirnov distance. The proposed algorithm operates beyond the setting of bounded distributions that have been studied in prior works; indeed, they apply to general unbounded MHR and regular distributions.
√ 3. We further show that these upper bounds under the population model cannot be further improved (up to constant log factors), by providing matching lower bounds for both the
MHR and regular distributions (see Theorem 3.7 and Theorem 3.9). 4. Lastly, we derive sample complexity upper bounds for learning a near-optimal auction for both MHR and regular distributions with multiple bidders (Theorem 4.3 and Theorem 4.4), and propose a practical algorithm (see Algorithm 2) which takes samples as input. We also 1More generally, the optimal auction picks the winner based on the virtual value after an “ironing” procedure. 2
provide accompanying sample complexity lower bounds (Theorem 4.5), and demonstrate a small gap relative to the corresponding upper bounds. 1.2