Abstract
Structured point process data harvested from various platforms poses new chal-lenges to the machine learning community. To cluster repeatedly observed marked point processes, we propose a novel mixture model of multi-level marked point processes for identifying potential heterogeneity in the observed data. Speciﬁcally, we study a matrix whose entries are marked log-Gaussian Cox processes and cluster rows of such a matrix. An efﬁcient semi-parametric Expectation-Solution (ES) algorithm combined with functional principal component analysis (FPCA) of point processes is proposed for model estimation. The effectiveness of the proposed framework is demonstrated through simulation studies and real data analyses. 1

Introduction
Large-scale, high-resolution, and irregularly scattered event time data has attracted enormous research interest recently in many applications, including medical visiting records [13], ﬁnancial transaction ledgers [28] and server logs [11]. Given a collection of event time sequences, one research thread is to identify groups displaying similar patterns. In practice, the signiﬁcance of this task emerges in multifarious scenarios. For example, matching users with similar activity patterns on social media platforms is beneﬁcial to ads recommendations; clustering patients by their visiting records may help predict the course of the disease progression.
Our study is motivated by a dataset we collected from Twitter, which consists of posting times of 500 university ofﬁcial accounts from April 15, to May 14th, 2021. Figure 1 displays posting time stamps of seven selected accounts in ﬁve consecutive days. While the daily posting patterns vary across different accounts, the posting date seems to also play an important role. Speciﬁcally, all accounts cascade a barrage of postings on April 16th while few postings appear on April 18th. Lastly, each posting is associated with a speciﬁc type of activity, namely, tweet, retweet, or reply. Our main interest is to cluster these multi-category, dynamic posting patterns into subgroups.
To characterize the highly complex posting patterns, we propose a mixture model of Multi-level
Marked Point Processes (MM-MPP). We assume that the event sequences from each cluster are realizations of a multi-level log-Gaussian Cox process (LGCP) [16], which has been demonstrated useful for modeling repeatedly observed event sequences [28]. We here extend their work to the case of mixture models and propose a semiparametric Expectation-Solution algorithm to learn the underlying cluster structure. The proposed learning algorithm avoids iterative numerical optimizations within each ES step and hence is computationally efﬁcient. In particular, the expectation step is carried out using MCMC samples based on the FPCA of the latent Gaussian processes, which imposes minimal parametric assumptions on the proposed model. Finally, we design an algorithm that can take advantage of array programming and GPU acceleration to further speed up computation. 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
Figure 1: The activities of selected accounts on Twitter. 2