Abstract
This paper considers the problem of estimating the unknown intervention targets in a causal directed acyclic graph from observational and interventional data. The focus is on soft interventions in linear structural equation models (SEMs). Current approaches to causal structure learning either work with known intervention targets or use hypothesis testing to discover the unknown intervention targets even for linear SEMs. This severely limits their scalability and sample complexity. This paper proposes a scalable and efﬁcient algorithm that consistently identiﬁes all intervention targets. The pivotal idea is to estimate the intervention sites from the difference between the precision matrices associated with the observational and interventional datasets. It involves repeatedly estimating such sites in different subsets of variables. The proposed algorithm can be used to also update a given observational Markov equivalence class into the interventional Markov equivalence class. Consistency, Markov equivalency, and sample complexity are established an-alytically. Finally, simulation results on both real and synthetic data demonstrate the gains of the proposed approach for scalable causal structure recovery. Implementa-tion of the algorithm and the code to reproduce the simulation results are available at https://github.com/bvarici/intervention-estimation. 1

Introduction
Directed acyclic graphs (DAG) are commonly used for encoding the cause-effect relationships among random variables. Extensive research has been dedicated to learning the structure of DAGs from their associated observational data. Structure learning from the observational data relies on uncovering conditional independence (CI) among the random variables. Since structurally distinct DAGs can encode the same set of CI relations, a DAG is identiﬁable only up to its Markov equivalence class (MEC) from the observational data. Subsequently, interventional data can be used to further reﬁne the MEC obtained from the observational data and learn speciﬁc causal effects.
This paper is motivated by addressing two signiﬁcant independent challenges in causal discovery.
First, most of the existing approaches for learning with interventional datasets require the intervention target set to be known, which can be a strong assumption. For instance, gene-editing technologies are known to perform cleavage at off-target genome sites [1]. Therefore, identifying the intervened nodes alone is a critical problem in structure learning, and despite its signiﬁcance, it remains uninvestigated.
Secondly, besides learning the structures of single DAGs, there exist application domains in which the goal is learning the structural changes between two related networks and their associated DAGs, or learning the sites of interventions. For instance, structural differences between the gene regulatory 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
networks of different subtypes of cancers can help to identify the roles of speciﬁc genes [2]. In electroencephalography analysis, the objective is to detect different brain regions that have different interactions when the subject is performing various tasks [3]. These brain regions correspond to intervened nodes in a causal graph representation. Another application area is fault detection in large-scale Internet of things and cloud applications [4]. Faulty nodes in the system can be considered as intervened nodes, and they are localized through intervention target estimation.
In practice, ﬁxing the target variable at a speciﬁc value or removing its causal dependencies is often difﬁcult, while disturbing the distribution of a target variable is easier [5]. The type of interventions that do not remove the causal effects are commonly observed in the real world. For example, elements of an advertising system can be modiﬁed without removing the causal effects [6]. In another example, consider molecular biology, in which the effects of infused chemicals to the cell are not set to speciﬁc values nor are they known precisely [7,8]. Therefore, we consider a soft intervention setting, in which we assume the conditional distributions of the target variables are changed, but no assumption is made on the causal effects. Finally, we assume that the topological ordering remains the same after the intervention procedure.
Under the soft intervention model, we propose an algorithm for estimating the intervention targets given the data from two linear SEMs associated with the observational and interventional data.
Motivated by the fact that the difference of the precision matrices associated with these two models is sparse, we focus on estimating the sparse difference between precision matrices to avoid extensive conditional independence testing. This leads to a signiﬁcant improvement in the computational com-plexity compared to those of the alternative methods. This facilitates scaling up to high-dimensional settings. Furthermore, we show that this algorithm can be used in conjunction with an observa-tional DAG learning procedure to reﬁne the MEC to interventional-MEC (
-MEC). Besides being consistent in the population setting, we provide the ﬁnite-sample guarantees for linear SEM with
Gaussian noise when the soft interventional changes between the two models are sparse. Our main contributions are as follows:
I
• We propose an algorithm that identiﬁes intervention targets under the intervention--MEC given the ob-faithfulness assumption. We show that our algorithm identiﬁes servational MEC.
I
• We provide the sample complexity of our algorithm under linear SEM with Gaussian noise.
• We perform experiments on both real biological and synthetic datasets to illustrate the ability to work in the high-dimensional settings and the gains compared to the relevant methods. 2