Abstract
In recent years, neural implicit representations gained popularity in 3D reconstruc-tion due to their expressiveness and ﬂexibility. However, the implicit nature of neural implicit representations results in slow inference time and requires care-ful initialization. In this paper, we revisit the classic yet ubiquitous point cloud representation and introduce a differentiable point-to-mesh layer using a differen-tiable formulation of Poisson Surface Reconstruction (PSR) that allows for a GPU-accelerated fast solution of the indicator function given an oriented point cloud.
The differentiable PSR layer allows us to efﬁciently and differentiably bridge the explicit 3D point representation with the 3D mesh via the implicit indicator ﬁeld, enabling end-to-end optimization of surface reconstruction metrics such as Cham-fer distance. This duality between points and meshes hence allows us to represent shapes as oriented point clouds, which are explicit, lightweight and expressive.
Compared to neural implicit representations, our Shape-As-Points (SAP) model is more interpretable, lightweight, and accelerates inference time by one order of magnitude. Compared to other explicit representations such as points, patches, and meshes, SAP produces topology-agnostic, watertight manifold surfaces. We demonstrate the effectiveness of SAP on the task of surface reconstruction from unoriented point clouds and learning-based reconstruction. 1

Introduction
Shape representations are central to many of the recent advancements in 3D computer vision and computer graphics, ranging from neural rendering [41,45,48,55,58] to shape reconstruction [10,26,40, 47, 50, 52, 70]. While conventional representations such as point clouds and meshes are efﬁcient and well-studied, they also suffer from several limitations: Point clouds are lightweight and easy to obtain, but do not directly encode surface information. Meshes, on the other hand, are usually restricted to
ﬁxed topologies. More recently, neural implicit representations [10, 40, 50] have shown promising results for representing geometry due to their ﬂexibility in encoding varied topologies, and their easy integration with differentiable frameworks. However, as such representations implicitly encode surface information, extracting the underlying surface is typically slow as they require numerous network evaluations in 3D space for extracting complete surfaces using marching cubes [10, 40, 50], or along rays for intersection detection in the context of volumetric rendering [45, 47, 49, 70].
In this work, we introduce a novel Poisson solver which performs fast GPU-accelerated Differentiable
Poisson Surface Reconstruction (DPSR) and solves for an indicator function from an oriented point cloud in a few milliseconds. Thanks to the differentiablility of our Poisson solver, gradients from a loss on the output mesh or a loss on the intermediate indicator grid can be efﬁciently backpropagated to update the oriented point cloud representation. This differential bridge between points, indicator
∗Work done while at UC Berkeley.
†Corresponding authors. 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
Representations
Points
[17]
Voxels
[11]
Meshes
[61]
Patches
[20]
Implicits
[40]
SAP (Ours)
GT
Efﬁciency Grid Eval Time (1283)
Priors
Easy Initialization
Watertight
No Self-intersection
Topology-Agnostic
Quality n/a (cid:52) (cid:56) n/a (cid:52) n/a (cid:52) (cid:52) n/a (cid:52) n/a (cid:52) (cid:52) (cid:56) (cid:56) n/a (cid:56) (cid:56) (cid:56) (cid:52) 0.33s (cid:56) (cid:52) (cid:52) (cid:52) 0.012s (cid:52) (cid:52) (cid:52) (cid:52)
Table 1: Overview of Different Shape Representations. Shape-As-Points produces higher quality geometry compared to other explicit representations [11, 17, 20, 61] and requires signiﬁcantly less inference time for extracting geometry compared to neural implicit representations [40]. functions, and meshes allows us to represent shapes as oriented point clouds. We therefore call this shape representation Shape-As-Points (SAP). Compared to existing shape representations, Shape-As-Points has the following advantages (see also Table 1):
Efﬁciency: SAP has a low memory footprint as it only requires storing a collection of oriented point samples at the surface, rather than volumetric quantities (voxels) or a large number of network parameters for neural implicit representations. Using spectral methods, the indicator ﬁeld can be computed efﬁciently (12 ms at 1283 resolution3), compared to the typical rather slow query time of neural implicit networks (330 ms using [40] at the same resolution). Accuracy: The resulting mesh can be generated at high resolutions, is guaranteed to be watertight, free from self-intersections and also topology-agnostic. Initialization: It is easy to initialize SAP with a given geometry such as template shapes or noisy observations. In contrast, neural implicit representations are harder to initialize, except for few simple primitives like spheres [1]. See supplementary for more discussions.
To investigate the aforementioned properties, we perform a set of controlled experiments. Moreover, we demonstrate state-of-the-art performance in reconstructing surface geometry from unoriented point clouds in two settings: an optimization-based setting that does not require training and is applicable to a wide range of shapes, and a learning-based setting for conditional shape reconstruction that is robust to noisy point clouds and outliers. In summary, the main contributions of this work are:
• We present Shape-As-Points, a novel shape representation that is interpretable, lightweight, and yields high-quality watertight meshes at low inference times.
• The core of the Shape-As-Points representation is a versatile, differentiable and generalizable
Poisson solver that can be used for a range of applications.
• We study various properties inherent to the Shape-As-Points representation, including inference time, sensitivity to initialization and topology-agnostic representation capacity.
• We demonstrate state-of-the-art reconstruction results from noisy unoriented point clouds at a signiﬁcantly reduced computational budget compared to existing methods.
Code is available at https://github.com/autonomousvision/shape_as_points. 2