Abstract
We address the non-convex optimisation problem of ﬁnding a sparse matrix on the
Stiefel manifold (matrices with mutually orthogonal columns of unit length) that maximises (or minimises) a quadratic objective function. Optimisation problems on the Stiefel manifold occur for example in spectral relaxations of various combinato-rial problems, such as graph matching, clustering, or permutation synchronisation.
Although sparsity is a desirable property in such settings, it is mostly neglected in spectral formulations since existing solvers, e.g. based on eigenvalue decom-position, are unable to account for sparsity while at the same time maintaining global optimality guarantees. We ﬁll this gap and propose a simple yet effective sparsity-promoting modiﬁcation of the Orthogonal Iteration algorithm for ﬁnding the dominant eigenspace of a matrix. By doing so, we can guarantee that our method ﬁnds a Stiefel matrix that is globally optimal with respect to the quadratic objective function, while in addition being sparse. As a motivating application we consider the task of permutation synchronisation, which can be understood as a constrained clustering problem that has particular relevance for matching multiple images or 3D shapes in computer vision, computer graphics, and beyond. We demonstrate that the proposed approach outperforms previous methods in this domain. 1

Introduction
We are interested in optimisation problems of the form arg max
U ∈St(m,d) f (U ) with f (U ) = tr(U T W U ) and St(m, d) := {X ∈ Rm×d : X T X = Id} , (1) where Id is the identity matrix of dimension d, W ∈ Rm×m and the set St(m, d) denotes the
Stiefel manifold (m ≥ d). Throughout the paper, w.l.o.g. we consider a maximisation formulation and we assume that W is a symmetric and positive semideﬁnite matrix (see Lemma 1 in Sec. 2).
Despite the non-convexity of Problem (1), problems of this form can be solved to global optimality based on the eigenvalue decomposition, i.e. by setting U ∗ = Vd, where Vd ∈ Rm×d denotes an orthogonal basis of eigenvectors corresponding to the d largest eigenvalues of W , see Lemma 2.
The fact that we can efﬁciently ﬁnd global optima of Problem (1) makes it a popular relaxation formulation of various difﬁcult combinatorial problems. This includes spectral relaxations [43, 26, 17] of the NP-hard quadratic assignment problem (QAP) [35], spectral clustering [33, 44], or spectral permutation synchronisation [34, 39, 31]. Yet, a major difﬁculty of such approaches is to discretise the (relaxed) continuous solution in order to obtain a feasible solution of the original (discrete) problem.
For example, in the QAP one optimises over the set of permutation matrices, in clustering one optimises over the set of matrices with rows comprising canonical basis vectors, and in permutation synchronisation one optimises over multiple permutation matrices that are stacked into a large block 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
matrix. Often such combinatorial sets can be characterised by Stiefel matrices that are sparse – for example, the set of (signed) d×d permutation matrices can be characterised by matrices in St(d, d) that have exactly d non-zero elements, whereas any other element in St(d, d) that has more than d non-zero elements is not a signed permutation matrix.
The most common approach to obtain sparse solutions in an optimisation problem is to integrate an explicit sparsity-promoting regulariser. However, a major hurdle when considering quadratic optimisation problems over the Stiefel manifold is that the incorporation of sparsity-promoting terms is not compatible with solutions based on eigenvalue decomposition, so that desirable global optimality guarantees are generally no longer maintained.
Instead, we depart from the common path of integrating explicit regularisers and instead exploit the orthogonal-invariance present in Problem (1) to assure sparsity. To be more speciﬁc, for any orthogonal matrix Q ∈ O(d) := St(d, d) it holds that f (U ) = tr(U T W U ) = tr(U T W U QQT ) = tr((U Q)T W (U Q)) = f (U Q). Hence, if ¯U ∈ St(m, d) is a solution to Problem (1), so is ¯U Q ∈
St(m, d) for any Q ∈ O(d). The subspace im( ¯U Q) that is spanned by ¯U Q for a given ¯U ∈ St(m, d) (and arbitrary Q ∈ O(d)) is equal to the subspace im( ¯U ). Motivated by this observation we utilise orthogonal-invariance in order to ﬁnd a solution U ∗ ∈ {U ∈ St(m, d) : im(U ) = im( ¯U )} such that
U ∗ is sparse. To this end, we build upon the additional degrees of freedom due to Q ∈ O(d), which allows to rotate a given solution ¯U ∈ St(m, d) to a sparser representation U ∗ = ¯U Q ∈ St(m, d) – most notably, while remaining a globally optimal solution to Problem (1).
Main contributions. We summarise our main contributions as follows: (i) For the ﬁrst time we propose an algorithm that exploits the orthogonal-invariance in quadratic optimisation problems over the Stiefel manifold while simultaneously accounting for sparsity in the solution. (ii) Despite its simplicity, our algorithm is effective as it builds on a modiﬁcation of the well-established Orthogonal
Iteration algorithm for ﬁnding the most dominant eigenspace of a given matrix. (iii) Our algorithm is guaranteed to converge to the dominant subspace with the same convergence rate as the original
Orthogonal Iteration algorithm, and our solution constitutes a global optimiser of Problem (1). (iv) We experimentally conﬁrm the efﬁcacy of our approach in the context of the permutation synchronisation problem. 2 Preliminaries &