Abstract
As a basic component of SE(3)-equivariant deep feature learning, steerable con-volution has recently demonstrated its advantages for 3D semantic analysis. The advantages are, however, brought by expensive computations on dense, volumetric data, which prevent its practical use for efﬁcient processing of 3D data that are inherently sparse. In this paper, we propose a novel design of Sparse Steerable
Convolution (SS-Conv) to address the shortcoming; SS-Conv greatly accelerates steerable convolution with sparse tensors, while strictly preserving the property of SE(3)-equivariance. Based on SS-Conv, we propose a general pipeline for precise estimation of object poses, wherein a key design is a Feature-Steering module that takes the full advantage of SE(3)-equivariance and is able to con-duct an efﬁcient pose reﬁnement. To verify our designs, we conduct thorough experiments on three tasks of 3D object semantic analysis, including instance-level 6D pose estimation, category-level 6D pose and size estimation, and category-level 6D pose tracking. Our proposed pipeline based on SS-Conv outperforms existing methods on almost all the metrics evaluated by the three tasks. Abla-tion studies also show the superiority of our SS-Conv over alternative convolu-tions in terms of both accuracy and efﬁciency. Our code is released publicly at https://github.com/Gorilla-Lab-SCUT/SS-Conv. 1

Introduction
SE(3)-equivariant deep networks [20, 25, 7] have shown the promise recently in some tasks of 3D semantic analysis, among which 3D Steerable CNN [25] is a representative one. 3D Steerable
CNNs employ steerable convolutions (termed as ST-Conv) to learn pose-equivariant features in a layer-wise manner, thus preserving the pose information of the 3D input. Intuitively speaking, for a layer of ST-Conv, any SE(3) transformation (r, t) applied to its 3D input would induce a pose-synchronized transformation to its output features, where r ∈ SO(3) stands for a rotation and t ∈ R3 for a translation. Fig. 1 (a) gives an illustration where given an SE(3) transformation of the input, the locations at which feature vectors are deﬁned are rigidly transformed with respect to (r, t), and the feature vectors themselves are also rotated by ρ(r) (ρ(r) is a representation of rotation r).
This property of SE(3)-equivariance enables the steerability of feature space. For example, without transforming the input, SE(3) transformation can be directly realized by steering in the feature space.
To produce steerable features, ST-Conv conﬁnes its feature domain to regular grids of 3D volumetric
∗Equal contribution
†Corresponding author 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
Figure 1: An illustration of SE(3)-equivariance achieved by (a) STeerable Convolution (ST-Conv) based on dense tensors, and (b) our Sparse Steerable Convolution (SS-Conv) based on sparse tensors, where arrows deﬁned on the 3D ﬁelds denote vector-formed, oriented features. Best view in the electronic version. data; it can thus be conveniently supported by 3D convolution routines. This compatibility with 3D convolutions eases the implementation of ST-Conv, but at the sacriﬁce of efﬁciently processing 3D data (e.g., point clouds) that are typically irregular and sparse; consequently, ST-Conv is still less widely used in broader areas of 3D semantic analysis.
In this paper, we propose a novel design of Sparse Steerable Convolution (SS-Conv) to address the aforementioned shortcoming faced by ST-Conv. SS-Conv can greatly accelerate steerable con-volutions with sparse tensors, while strictly preserving the SE(3)-equivariance in feature learning;
Fig. 1 (b) gives the illustration. To implement SS-Conv, we construct convolutional kernels as linear combinations of basis ones based on spherical harmonics, which satisfy the rotation-steerable constraint of SE(3)-equivariant convolutions [25], and implement the convolution as matrix-matrix multiply-add operations on GPUs only at active sites, which are recorded along with their features as sparse tensors.
Although SE(3)-equivariant feature learning is widely used in 3D object recognition, its potentials for other tasks of 3D semantic analysis have not been well explored yet. In this work, we make the attempt to apply our proposed SS-Conv to object pose estimation in 3D space. To this end, we propose a general pipeline based on SS-Conv, which stacks layers of SS-Conv as the backbone, and decodes object poses directly from the learned SE(3)-equivariant features. A novel Feature-Steering module is also designed into the pipeline to support iterative pose reﬁnement, by taking advantage of the steerability of the learned features. We conduct thorough experiments on three tasks of pose-related, 3D object semantic analysis, including instance-level 6D pose estimation, category-level 6D pose and size estimation, and category-level 6D pose tracking. Our proposed pipeline based on SS-Conv outperforms existing methods on almost all the metrics evaluated by the three tasks; the gaps are clearer in the regimes of high-precision pose estimation. Ablation studies also show the superiority of our SS-Conv over alternative convolutions in terms of both accuracy and efﬁciency. 2