Abstract
Given taxi-ride counts information between departure and destination locations, how can we forecast their future demands? In general, given a data stream of events with seasonal patterns that innovate over time, how can we effectively and efﬁciently forecast future events? In this paper, we propose Shifting Seasonal
Matrix Factorization approach, namely SSMF, that can adaptively learn multiple seasonal patterns (called regimes), as well as switching between them. Our pro-posed method has the following properties: (a) it accurately forecasts future events by detecting regime shifts in seasonal patterns as the data stream evolves; (b) it works in an online setting, i.e., processes each observation in constant time and memory; (c) it effectively realizes regime shifts without human intervention by using a lossless data compression scheme. We demonstrate that our algorithm outperforms state-of-the-art baseline methods by accurately forecasting upcoming events on three real-world data streams. 1

Introduction
The ubiquity of multi-viewed data has increased the importance of advanced mining algo-rithms that aim at forecasting future events [Bai et al., 2019, Wu et al., 2019, Deng et al., 2020], such as forecasting taxi-ride counts based on their departure and destination loca-tions, and time information, where the events can be represented as a stream of tuples (departure, destination, time; count). Infection spread rates during epidemics can also be repre-sented in a similar form as (location, disease, time; count), and the task is to forecast the infection count. Given such a large data stream produced by user events, how can we effectively forecast future events? How can we extract meaningful patterns to improve forecasting accuracy? Intuitively, the problem we wish to solve is as follows:
Problem 1 Given an event data stream that contains seasonal patterns, forecast the number of future events between each pair of entities in a streaming setting.
As natural periodicity occurs in several types of data, one of the promising directions to understand the vital dynamics of a data stream is to consider seasonal phenomena. However, high-dimensional data
∗Equal contribution 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
Table 1: Relative Advantages of SSMF
SVD/NMF++ RegimeCast
Sparse Data
Regime Shifts
Seasonal Pattern
Drifting components (cid:88)
--some
-(cid:88)
--TRMF (cid:88)
-(cid:88)
-SMF (cid:88)
-(cid:88) (cid:88)
SSMF (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) structures in sparse time-series pose many challenging tasks to uncover such valuable seasonal patterns
[Chi and Kolda, 2012], while modeling seasonality or periodic patterns has been a well-studied topic in literature [Takahashi et al., 2017]. Moreover, in a streaming setting, data dynamics vary over time, and thus the models learned with historical data can be ineffective as we observe new data. Although online learning schemes, such as [Schaul et al., 2013, Jothimurugesan et al., 2018, Yang et al., 2018,
Nimishakavi et al., 2018, Lu et al., 2019], provide solutions to overcome this concern, disregarding all past dynamics fails to capture re-occurring patterns in the subsequent processes. On non-stationary data streams, such approaches no longer converge to the optimal parameters but capture average patterns for several phenomena, which causes less accurate forecasting. Adequate methods should retain multiple patterns where each pattern is updated incrementally for prevailing tendencies and leveraged for forecasting.
In this paper, we focus on online matrix factorization for real-time forecasting with seasonality.
Speciﬁcally, we propose a streaming method, Shifting Seasonal Matrix Factorization (SSMF), which allows the factorization to be aware of multiple smooth time-evolving patterns as well as abrupt innovations in seasonal patterns, which are retained as regimes. In summary, our contributions are: 1. Accuracy: Outperforms state-of-the-art baseline methods by accurately forecasting 50-steps ahead of future events. 2. Scalability: Scales linearly with the number of regimes, and uses constant time and memory for adaptively factorizing data streams. 3. Effectiveness: Finds meaningful seasonal patterns (regimes) throughout the stream and divides the stream into segments based on incrementally selected patterns. SSMF uses a lossless data compression scheme to determine the number of regimes.
Reproducibility: Our datasets and source code are publicly available at: https://www.github. com/kokikwbt/ssmf 2