Abstract
Recent work in iterative voting has deﬁned the additive dynamic price of anarchy (ADPoA) as the difference in social welfare between the truthful and worst-case equilibrium proﬁles resulting from repeated strategic manipulations. While iter-ative plurality has been shown to only return alternatives with at most one less initial votes than the truthful winner, it is less understood how agents’ welfare changes in equilibrium. To this end, we differentiate agents’ utility from their ma-nipulation mechanism and determine iterative plurality’s ADPoA in the worst- and average-cases. We ﬁrst prove that the worst-case ADPoA is linear in the number of agents. To overcome this negative result, we study the average-case ADPoA and prove that equilibrium winners have a constant order welfare advantage over the truthful winner in expectation. Our positive results illustrate the prospect for social welfare to increase due to strategic manipulation. 1

Introduction
Voting is one of the most popular methods for a group of agents to make a collective decision based on their preferences. Whether a decision is for a high-stakes presidential election or a routine luncheon, agents submit their preferences and a voting rule is applied to select a winning alternative.
One critical ﬂaw of voting is its susceptibility to strategic manipulations. That is, agents may have an incentive to misreport their preferences (i.e. votes) to obtain a more favorable outcome. Un-fortunately, manipulation is inevitable under any non-dictatorial single-round voting systems when there are three or more alternatives, as recognized by the celebrated Gibbard-Satterthwaite theo-rem [Gibbard, 1973, Satterthwaite, 1975]. Consequently, decades of research sought to deter ma-nipulation, especially by high computational barriers [Bartholdi et al., 1989, Faliszewski et al., 2010,
Faliszewski and Procaccia, 2010]; see [Conitzer and Walsh, 2016] for a recent survey of the ﬁeld.
While there is a large body of literature on manipulation of single-round voting systems, sequential and iterative voting procedures are less understood. Indeed, these procedures occur in a variety of applications, such as Doodle or presidential election polls, where people ﬁnalize their votes after previewing others’ responses [Meir et al., 2010, Desmedt and Elkind, 2010, Xia and Conitzer, 2010,
Reijngoud and Endriss, 2012, Zou et al., 2015]. Our key question is:
What is the effect of strategic behavior in sequential and iterative voting?
A series of work initiated by Meir et al. [2010] characterizes the dynamics and equilibria of iterative voting, where agents sequentially and myopically improve their reported preferences based on other agents’ reports [Reyhani and Wilson, 2012, Lev and Rosenschein, 2012, Brˆanzei et al., 2013, Grandi et al., 2013, Obraztsova et al., 2013, Meir et al., 2014, Rabinovich et al., 2015, Obraztsova et al., 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
2015, Endriss et al., 2016, Meir, 2016, Tsang and Larson, 2016, Koolyk et al., 2017]. While the convergence of iterative voting has been investigated for many commonly studied voting rules, the effect of strategic behavior, in terms of aggregate social welfare, remains largely unclear.
A notable exception is Brˆanzei et al. [2013]’s work that introduced and characterized the addi-tive dynamic price of anarchy (ADPoA) of iterative voting with respect to the plurality, veto, and
Borda social choice functions. The (additive) DPoA measures the social welfare (difference) ratio between the truthful winner and an iterative policy’s equilibrium winners when an adversary min-imizes aggregate social welfare by controlling both the order in which agents make their strategic manipulations and agents’ truthful preferences altogether. In particular, Brˆanzei et al. [2013] proved that under iterative plurality, the number of agents whose top preference is an equilibrium winner is at most one less than that of the truthful plurality winner. Therefore, strategic behavior does not have a signiﬁcant negative impact on the social welfare measured by the sum plurality score of the winner. Nevertheless, it is unclear whether this observation holds for other notions of social welfare. 1.1 Our Contributions
We address the key question discussed above in the iterative voting framework, ﬁrst proposed by Meir et al. [2010], by characterizing Brˆanzei et al. [2013]’s ADPoA under plurality dynamics and rank-based utility functions that differ from the iteration method. Given m ≥ 3 alternatives, a ranked-based utility function is characterized by a utility vector (cid:126)u such that each agent receives ui utility if their i-th ranked alternative wins, although this alternative may differ for each agent. We study iterative plurality due to its simplicity and popularity in practice. Moreover, our results ab-solve the need for the mechanism’s center to know (cid:126)u exactly, thus conserving agents’ privacy. Still, we assume this is constant for all agents.
Our ﬁrst main result (Theorem 1) states that, unfortunately, for any ﬁxed m ≥ 3 and utility vector (cid:126)u, the ADPoA is Θ(n) for n agents. Therefore, the positive result achieved by Brˆanzei et al. [2013] is not upheld if (cid:126)u differs from plurality utility under the iterative plurality mechanism.
To overcome this negative worst-case result, we introduce the notion of expected additive dynamic price of anarchy (EADPoA), which presumes agents’ truthful preferences to be generated from a probability distribution. Our second main result (Theorem 2) is positive and surprises us: for any
ﬁxed m ≥ 3 and utility vector (cid:126)u, the EADPoA is −Ω(1) when agents’ preferences are i.i.d. uni-formly at random, known as Impartial Culture (IC) in social choice. In particular, our result suggests that strategic behavior is bliss because iterative voting helps agents choose an alternative with higher expected social welfare, regardless of the order of agents’ strategic manipulations.
Techniques. We compute the EADPoA by partitioning the (randomly generated) proﬁles accord-ing to their potential winners – the alternatives that can be made to win by incrementing their plural-ity scores by at most one. Conditioned on proﬁles with two potential winners, we show that iterative plurality returns the alternative that beats the other in a head-to-head competition (Lemma 1). This type of “self selection” improves the expected social welfare over truthful plurality winner by Ω(1) (Lemma 2). When there are three or more potential winners, we further show that the expected welfare loss is o(1) (Lemmas 3 and 4). Since the likelihood of k-way ties is exponentially small (in fact, Θ
[Xia, 2021]), the overall social welfare is improved in expectation. We provide an experimental justiﬁcation of our second main result in Appendix B. n− k−1 (cid:17) (cid:16) 2 1.2