Abstract
A ubiquitous learning problem in today’s digital market is, during repeated inter-actions between a seller and a buyer, how a seller can gradually learn optimal pricing decisions based on the buyer’s past purchase responses. A fundamental challenge of learning in such a strategic setup is that the buyer will naturally have incentives to manipulate his responses in order to induce more favorable learning outcomes for him. To understand the limits of the seller’s learning when facing such a strategic and possibly manipulative buyer, we study a natural yet powerful buyer manipulation strategy. That is, before the pricing game starts, the buyer simply commits to “imitate” a different value function by pretending to always react optimally according to this imitative value function.
We fully characterize the optimal imitative value function that the buyer should imitate as well as the resultant seller revenue and buyer surplus under this optimal buyer manipulation. Our characterizations reveal many useful insights about what happens at equilibrium. For example, a seller with concave production cost will obtain essentially 0 revenue at equilibrium whereas the revenue for a seller with convex production cost is the Bregman divergence of her cost function between no production and certain production. Finally, and importantly, we show that a more powerful class of pricing schemes does not necessarily increase, in fact, may be harmful to, the seller’s revenue. Our results not only lead to an effective prescriptive way for buyers to manipulate learning algorithms but also shed lights on the limits of what a seller can really achieve when pricing in the dark. 1

Introduction
Pricing is a basic question in microeconomics [24] as well as a ubiquitous problem in today’s digital markets [16]. In its textbook style setup, there are two agents: a buyer (he) and a seller (she). The seller produces d types of divisible goods for sale and has production cost c(x) for producing bundle x ∈ Rd
+ of the d goods. Using a standard linear pricing scheme with unit price pi for goods i ∈ [d], the seller charges the buyer x · p when he purchases bundle x ∈ Rd
+ under price vector p ∈ Rd
+.
Naturally, the buyer’s optimal bundle for purchase depends on his value function v(x) about the products. We assume that, given price vector p, the rational buyer will always pick the optimal bundle that maximizes his quasilinear utility [v(x) − x · p]. The key question of interest is how the seller can compute the revenue-maximizing optimal prices assuming rational buyer purchase behaviors.
∗This work is supported by a Google Faculty Research Award and an NSF grant CCF-2132506. 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
The above basic problem can be easily solved if the seller has access to the buyer’s value function v(x). However, in practice, this value function is usually private and unknown to the seller. To address this challenge, there has been a rich line of recent research which looks to design the optimal pricing scheme against an unknown buyer. Some of these work have adopted learning-based approaches that aim to compute the proﬁt maximizing price by interacting with the buyer and gleaning information about the buyer’s utility function [3, 33, 32]. These are motivated by the wide spread of e-commerce today where the seller can repeatedly interact with the same buyer or buyers from the same population with similar preferences. For example, in online advertising, ad exchange platforms learn to price advertisers from past behaviors; in online retailing, retailers learn to price customers from their past purchase history; and in crowdsourcing, platforms learn to reward workers’ efforts. Another line of works look to design dynamic pricing mechanisms that dynamically adjusts the price based on the observed past buyer purchase behaviors with the objective of maximizing the aggregated total revenue [4, 5, 26, 27, 38].
A key challenge of pricing against such unknown buyers, regardless through learning or dynamic pricing, is that the buyer may manipulate his responses in order to mislead the seller’s algorithm and induce more favorable outcomes for themselves. This is a fundamental issue when learning from strategic data sources, and is particularly relevant in this pricing setup due to the strategic nature of the problem. In this case, the buyer controls the information content to the seller, therefore he naturally has incentives to utilize this advantage to gain more payoff by strategically misleading the seller’s algorithms. Indeed, as observed in previous studies, online advertisers may strategically respond to an ad exchange platform’s prices in order to induce a lower future price [22]; Consumers strategically time their purchases in order to obtain lower prices at online retailing platforms [23].
To understand the limits of the seller’s optimal pricing against such a strategic and possibly ma-nipulative buyer, we put forward a natural model which augments the above basic pricing problem with only one additional step — i.e., we assume that the game starts with the buyer committing to a different value functions, coined the imitative value function, after which the seller will compute the optimal pricing scheme against this imitative buyer value function. The buyer’s commitment to an imitative value function captures a simple yet powerful buyer manipulation strategy that can be used against any seller learning algorithms — that is, the buyer simply behaves consistently according to this imitative value function during the entire interaction process. Intuitively, the motivation of such commitment assumption comes directly from the fact that the seller has no information about the buyer and has to optimize pricing “in the dark”. Consequently, if the buyer consistently behaves according to some different imitative value function, the seller is not able to distinguish this buyer from another buyer who truly has the value function (see more justiﬁcations of the commitment assumption in Section 3). Moreover, such an imitation strategy is also easy to execute in practice by the buyer regardless whether the seller is learning from him or is adopting dynamic pricing schemes.
In fact, the buyer could even just report his imitative value function to the seller directly at the beginning of any interaction. In this situation, no learning or dynamic pricing will be needed as the buyer will indeed always behave according to the imitative value function. Therefore, all the seller can do is to directly apply the optimal pricing scheme for the buyer’s imitative value function.
We remark that such imitation-based manipulation strategy has attracted much interest in recent works, with similar motivations as us — i.e., trying to understand how to manipulate learning algorithm or conversely, how to design strategy-aware learning algorithms to mitigate such manipulation. However, most of these works have focused on the general Stackelberg game model [19, 10] as well as the
Stackelberg security games [18, 30, 29]. Our optimal pricing problem is also a Stackelberg model and thus a natural ﬁt for the study. The crucial difference between our work and previous studies is that both agents in our model have continuous utility functions whereas all these previous works
[19, 18, 30, 10] have discrete agent utility functions. Therefore, our model leads to a functional analysis and optimization problem, which is more involved. Fortunately, we show that the optimal functional solution can still be characterized by leveraging the structure of the pricing problem. 1.1 Our Results and Implications
Given the effectiveness and easy applicability of the buyer’s imitative strategy described above, this paper studies what the optimal buyer imitative value function is and how it would affect buyer’s surplus and the seller’s revenue. Our main result provides a full characterization about the optimal buyer imitative value function. We show that the optimal buyer imitative value function u∗ features a speciﬁc bundle of products x∗ that is most desirable to the buyer. Interestingly, it turns out 2
that u∗ is a Leontief-type piece-wise linear concave value function [2] such that the buyer would only proportionally value a fraction of the desired bundle x∗ and nothing else. Moreover, we also characterize the seller revenue and buyer surplus at equilibrium as well as necessary and sufﬁcient conditions under which the seller obtains strictly positive revenue.
The optimal buyer imitative value function turns out to depend crucially on the seller’s production cost function. When the cost function is concave, we show that the optimal buyer imitative value function u∗ will “squeeze” the seller revenue essentially to 0. The fortunate news for the seller, however, is that ﬁnding out the u∗ turns out to be an NP-hard task for the buyer. In fact, we prove that it is
NP-hard to ﬁnd the u∗ that can guarantee a polynomial faction of the optimal buyer surplus. For the widely adopted convex production cost, we show that the equilibrium seller revenue is the Bregman divergence between production 0 and the x∗ bundle mentioned above. This illustrates an interesting message that convex production costs are “better” at handling buyer’s strategic manipulations. Note that production costs are indeed more often believed to be convex since economic models typically assume that marginal costs increase as quantity goes up [35, 34].
All our characterizations so far focus on the standard linear pricing scheme. Our last result examines the possibility of using a more general class of pricing schemes to address the buyer’s strategic manipulation. Surprisingly, we show that for the strictly more general class of concave pricing functions (i.e., the seller is allowed to use any concave function as a pricing function), the equilibrium will remain the same as described above. Therefore, the more general pricing schemes do not necessarily help to address buyer’s manipulation behavior. In fact, we show that there exist examples where strictly broader class of pricing functions leads to strictly worse seller revenue. This is because more general pricing schemes may “overﬁt” buyer’s incentives, which renders it easier to manipulate.
This illustrates an interesting phenomenon in learning from strategic data sources and shares similar spirit to overﬁtting in standard machine learning tasks. 1.2 Additional