Abstract
Multimodal regression is a fundamental task, which integrates the information from different sources to improve the performance of follow-up applications. However, existing methods mainly focus on improving the performance and often ignore the conﬁdence of prediction for diverse situations. In this study, we are devoted to trustworthy multimodal regression which is critical in cost-sensitive domains. To this end, we introduce a novel Mixture of Normal-Inverse Gamma distributions (MoNIG) algorithm, which efﬁciently estimates uncertainty in principle for adap-tive integration of different modalities and produces a trustworthy regression result.
Our model can be dynamically aware of uncertainty for each modality, and also ro-bust for corrupted modalities. Furthermore, the proposed MoNIG ensures explicitly representation of (modality-speciﬁc/global) epistemic and aleatoric uncertainties, respectively. Experimental results on both synthetic and different real-world data demonstrate the effectiveness and trustworthiness of our method on various multi-modal regression tasks (e.g., temperature prediction for superconductivity, relative location prediction for CT slices, and multimodal sentiment analysis3). 1

Introduction
There are plenty of multimodal data involved in the real world, and we experience the world from different modalities [1]. For example, the autonomous driving systems are usually equipped with multiple sensors to collect information from different perspectives [2]. In medical diagnosis [3], multimodal data usually come from different types of examinations, typically including a variety of clinical data. Effectively exploiting the information of different sources to improve learning performance is a long-standing and challenging goal in machine learning.
∗Equal contribution.
†Corresponding author. Please correspond to: zhangchangqing@tju.edu.cn. 3Code: https://github.com/MaHuanAAA/MoNIG. 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
Most multimodal regression methods [4, 5, 6, 7] usually focus on improving the regression perfor-mance by exploiting the complementary information among multiple modalities. Despite effective-ness, it is quite risky for these methods to be deployed in cost-sensitive applications due to the lack of reliability and interpretability. One underlying deﬁciency is that traditional models usually assume the quality of each modality is basically stable, which limits them to produce reliable prediction, especially when some modalities are noisy or even corrupted [8, 9]. Moreover, existing models only output (over-conﬁdent) predictions [10, 11], which can not well support safe decision and might be disastrous for safety-critical applications.
Uncertainty estimation provides a way for trustworthy prediction [12, 13]. The decisions made by models without uncertainty estimation are untrustworthy because they are prone to be affected by noises or limited training data. Therefore, it is highly desirable to characterize uncertainty in the learning for AI-based systems. More speciﬁcally, when a model is given an input that has never been seen or is severely contaminated, it should be able to express “I don’t know”. The untrustworthy models are vulnerable to be attacked and it may also lead to wrong decisions, where the cost is often unbearable in critical domains [14].
Basically, it can endow the model with trustworthiness by dynamically modeling uncertainty. There-fore, we propose a novel algorithm that conducts multimodal regression in a trustworthy manner.
Speciﬁcally, our proposed algorithm is a uniﬁed framework modeling uncertainty under a fully probabilistic framework. Our model integrates multiple modalities by introducing a Mixture of
Normal-inverse Gamma distributions (MoNIG), which hierarchically characterizes the uncertainties and accordingly promotes both regression accuracy and trustworthiness. In summary, the contribu-tions of this work include: (1) We propose a novel trustworthy multimodal regression algorithm. Our method effectively fuses multiple modalities under the evidential regression framework equipped with modality-speciﬁc uncertainty and global uncertainty. (2) To integrate different modalities, a novel
MoNIG is designed to be dynamically aware of modality-speciﬁc noise/corruption with the estimated uncertainty, which promisingly supports trustworthy decision making and also signiﬁcantly promotes robustness as well. (3) We conduct extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-application data, which validate the effectiveness, robustness, and reliability of the proposed model on different multimodal regression tasks (e.g., critical temperature prediction for superconductivity [15], relative location of CT slices, and human multimodal sentiment analysis). 2