Abstract
We introduce robust principal component analysis from a data matrix in which the entries of its columns have been corrupted by permutations, termed Unlabeled
Principal Component Analysis (UPCA). Using algebraic geometry, we establish that UPCA is a well-deﬁned algebraic problem in the sense that the only matri-ces of minimal rank that agree with the given data are row-permutations of the ground-truth matrix, arising as the unique solutions of a polynomial system of equations. Further, we propose an efﬁcient two-stage algorithmic pipeline for
UPCA suitable for the practically relevant case where only a fraction of the data have been permuted. Stage-I employs outlier-robust PCA methods to estimate the ground-truth column-space. Equipped with the column-space, Stage-II applies recent methods for unlabeled sensing to restore the permuted data. Experiments on synthetic data, face images, educational and medical records reveal the potential of
UPCA for applications such as data privatization and record linkage. 1

Introduction 1.1 Motivation
In principal component analysis, a cornerstone of machine learning and data science, one is given a data matrix ˜X, assumed to be a corrupted version of a ground-truth data matrix X∗ = [x∗ n] ∈
Rm×n, typically but not necessarily assumed to have low rank, and the objective is to estimate X∗ or the column-space S∗ ⊂ Rm of X∗. The most common types of corruptions that have attracted interest in modern studies are additive sparse perturbations [6, 47], outlier data points that lie away from S∗ [43, 40], and missing entries, the latter also known as low-rank matrix completion [7, 4]. 1 · · · x∗
Recently, permutations have been emerging as another type of data corruption, typically set in the context of linear regression, where the correspondences between the input and the output data have been partially distorted or even are entirely unavailable [38, 39, 22, 17, 30, 31, 46, 19, 41, 36]. There, one is given a point x∗ of a linear subspace S∗, but only up to a permutation of its coordinates, say
˜x = Π∗x∗ with Π∗ an unknown permutation, and the goal is to ﬁnd x∗ from the data ˜x, S∗. This
Unlabeled Sensing [38, 39] problem has many potential machine learning applications, e.g., record linkage [30, 31], visual [26, 27] or textual [5, 28, 29] permutation learning, and matching problems in neuroscience [21] and biology [1, 42].
While methods for unlabeled sensing rely on knowledge of the source subspace S∗, this is not always known in practice. On the other hand, data of the form ˜X = [˜x1, . . . , ˜xn] ∈ Rm×n with ˜xj = Π∗ j x∗ j an unknown permutation of an unknown point x∗ j ∈ S∗, are often available, thus raising the question of whether S∗ can be estimated from ˜X. An important example of this situation is record linkage
[13, 20, 3], where the objective is to integrate data from independent sources, ˜x1, . . . , ˜xn ∈ Rm, for subsequent data analysis. Since the entries of different records ˜xi’s are collected separately, the data matrix ˜X is unlabeled in the sense that, the entries of its i-th row do not necessarily correspond 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
to the same entity. Such kind of unlabeled data ˜X also arise in the context of data privatization, where the data provider anonymizes the original data X∗ by permuting each column of X∗ prior to release [11, 16]. Data re-identiﬁcation is a concern since companies with privacy policies, health care providers, and ﬁnancial institutions may release the collected data after anonymization. Understanding the fundamental limits of re-identifying the original data X∗ from the released ones ˜X is essential for striking a balance between data privacy and data preservation, the subject of a plenary talk in the 2019 International Conference on Machine Learning [2]. 1.2 Contributions
In this paper we consider the recovery of X∗ from its unlabeled version ˜X, which we term Unlabeled
Principal Component Analysis (UPCA). We make the following contributions:
• We establish that as long as r := rank(X∗) < min{m, n} and X∗ is generic (see Deﬁnition 1), then up to a permutation of its rows, X∗ is the only matrix of rank less than or equal to r that is compatible with ˜X. This asserts that UPCA is a well-posed problem, since the inherent ambiguity of whether ˜X comes from X∗ or a row-permuted version of X∗ is in most cases practically harmless.
• We establish that in this basic formulation UPCA is a purely algebraic problem, by exhibiting a polynomial system of equations parametrized by ˜X, whose solutions are all the row-permutations of X∗; solving the UPCA problem amounts to obtaining one such solution.
• Inasmuch as solving this polynomial system is in principle NP-hard, we introduce an efﬁcient algorithmic pipeline for the practically relevant case where a signiﬁcant part of the data have undergone the same permutation, while the rest of the points have been permuted arbitrarily; in the case of record linkage this would correspond to one of the records having much larger size than the others. The ﬁrst stage of the pipeline employs PCA methods with robustness to outliers [43, 33, 25, 45, 37, 48, 18] to produce an estimate ^S of S∗ from ˜X; the second stage of the pipeline uses unlabeled sensing methods [30, 32, 36, 23] to furnish an estimate ^X of
X∗ from ^S and ˜X.
• We introduce a simple but efﬁcient algorithm for unlabeled sensing based on least-squares with recursive ﬁltration (Algorithm 2).
• We assess our algorithmic pipeline on synthetic data, face images, educational and medical records, with encouraging results. 1.3