Abstract
Recent years have witnessed an increasing use of coordinated accounts on social media, operated by misinformation campaigns to influence public opinion and manipulate social outcomes. Consequently, there is an urgent need to develop an effective methodology for coordinated group detection to combat the misinforma-tion on social media. However, the sparsity of account activities on social media limits the performance of existing deep learning based coordination detectors as they can not exploit useful prior knowledge. Instead, the detectors incorporated with prior knowledge suffer from limited expressive power and poor performance.
Therefore, in this paper we propose a coordination detection framework incor-porating neural temporal point process with prior knowledge such as temporal logic or pre-defined filtering functions. Specifically, when modeling the observed data from social media with neural temporal point process, we jointly learn a
Gibbs distribution of group assignment based on how consistent an assignment is to (1) the account embedding space and (2) the prior knowledge. To address the challenge that the distribution is hard to be efficiently computed and sampled from, we design a theoretically guaranteed variational inference approach to learn a mean-field approximation for it. Experimental results on a real-world dataset show the effectiveness of our proposed method compared to state-of-the-art model in both unsupervised and semi-supervised settings. We further apply our model on a COVID-19 Vaccine Tweets dataset. The detection result suggests presence of suspicious coordinated efforts on spreading misinformation about COVID-19 vaccines. 1

Introduction
Recent research reveals that the information diffusion on social media is heavily influenced by hidden account groups [1, 30, 31], many of which are coordinated accounts operated by misinformation campaigns (an example shown in Fig. 1a). This form of abuse to spread misinformation has been seen in different fields, including politics (e.g. the election) [20] and healthcare (e.g. the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic) [31]. This persistent abuse as well as the urgency to combat misinformation prompt us to develop effective methodologies to uncover hidden coordinated groups from the diffusion cascade of information on social media.
On social media, the diffusion cascade of a piece of information (like a tweet) can be considered as a realization of a marked temporal point process where each mark of an event type corresponds to an account. Therefore, we can formulate uncovering coordinated accounts as detecting mark groups from observed point process data, which leads to a natural solution that first acquires account
∗Equally contributed 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
(a) Example of collaborated behaviours. (b) Frequency statistic of accounts.
Figure 1: The figure (a) is an example of coordinated accounts detected by our method on Twitter.
They retweet similar anti-vaccine contents about COVID-19 Vaccines from same or different sources.
The figure (b) is the frequency statistic of accounts in IRA dataset about the U.S. 2016 Election. embeddings from the observed data with deep learning (e.g. neural temporal point process) and then conducts group detection in the embedding space [20, 32]. However, the data from social media has a special and important property, which is that the appearance of accounts in the diffusion cascades usually follows a long-tail distribution [18] (an example shown in Fig. 1b). This property brings a unique challenge: compared to a few dominant accounts, most accounts appear sparsely in the data, limiting the performance of deep representation learning based models. Some previous works exploiting pre-defined collective behaviours [2, 37, 25] can circumvent this challenge. They mainly follow the paradigm that first constructs similarity graphs from the data with some prior knowledge or hypothesis and then conducts graph based clustering. Their expressive power, however, is heavily limited as the complicated interactions are simply represented as edges with scalar weights, and they exhibit strong reliance on predefined signatures of coordination. As a result, their performances are significantly weaker than the state-of-the-art deep representation learning based model [32].
To address above challenges, we propose a knowledge informed neural temporal point process model, named Variational Inference for Group Detection (VigDet). It represents the domain knowledge of collective behaviors of coordinated accounts by defining different signatures of coordination, such as accounts that co-appear, or are synchronized in time, are more likely to be coordinated. Different from previous works that highly rely on assumed prior knowledge and cannot effectively learn from the data [2, 37], VigDet encodes prior knowledge as temporal logic and power functions so that it guides the learning of neural point process model and effectively infer coordinated behaviors. In addition, it maintains a distribution over group assignments and defines a potential score function that measures the consistency of group assignments in terms of both embedding space and prior knowledge. As a result, VigDet can make effective inferences over the constructed prior knowledge graph while jointly learning the account embeddings using neural point process.
A crucial challenge in our framework is that the group assignment distribution, which is a Gibbs distribution defined on a Conditional Random Field [17], contains a partition function as normalizer
[16]. Consequently it is NP-hard to compute or sample, leading to difficulties in both learning and inference [4, 15]. To address this issue, we apply variational inference [22]. Specifically, we approximate the Gibbs distribution as a mean field distribution [24]. Then we jointly learn the approximation and learnable parameters with EM algorithm to maximize the evidence lower bound (ELBO) [22] of the observed data likelihood. In the E-step, we freeze the learnable parameters and infer the optimal approximation, while in the M-step, we freeze the approximation and update the parameters to maximize an objective function which is a lower bound of the ELBO with theoretical guarantee. Our experiments on a real world dataset [20] involving coordination detection validate the effectiveness of our model compared with other baseline models including the current state of the art.
We further apply our method on a dataset of tweets about COVID-19 vaccine without ground-truth coordinated group label. The analysis on the detection result suggests the existence of suspicious coordinated efforts to spread misinformation and conspiracies about COVID-19 vaccines. 2