Abstract
We propose new width-based planning and learning algorithms inspired from a careful analysis of the design decisions made by previous width-based planners.
The algorithms are applied over the Atari-2600 games and our best performing algorithm, Novelty guided Critical Path Learning (N-CPL), outperforms the previously introduced width-based planning and learning algorithms 𝜋-IW(1),
𝜋-IW(1)+ and 𝜋-HIW(n, 1). Furthermore, we present a taxonomy of the Atari-2600 games according to some of their defining characteristics. This analysis of the games provides further insight into the behaviour and performance of the algorithms introduced. Namely, for games with large branching factors, and games with sparse meaningful rewards, N-CPL outperforms 𝜋-IW, 𝜋-IW(1)+ and 𝜋-HIW(n, 1). 1

Introduction
The Atari-2600 games provide useful environments for benchmarking autonomous agents due to the diversity of behaviour required across the different games. The Atari-2600 games can be accessed through the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) [1] which provides a typical Reinforcement Learning (RL) environment interface where given a state, the agent selects an action and receives a resulting state and reward. The two main approaches that have been used by autonomous agents applied to the
Atari-2600 games have been RL methods [2, 3, 4] and Planning methods [5, 6]. The RL approaches have had great success surpassing the performance of human players for many of the Atari-2600 games. However, RL approaches require long training times in order to train the Neural Networks (NN) used for policy and value functions. Planning agents do not require training time and instead use a bounded, fixed computational budget to decide which action to take at each time step of the game.
The budget allowed for planning for each action is set as part of the experimental setting and can be set in such a way that the agent can play a game in real-time. Through the ALE interface, the agent is not provided a description of the transition or reward functions as is the case of models described through languages such as the Planning Domain Description Language (PDDL) [7]. Instead, planning agents applied to the Atari-2600 games are required to work with a simulator, treating the environment’s transition and reward functions as a black-box [5].
Width-based planning agents have been shown to be particularly successful on the Atari-2600 games when compared to other planning agents [5, 6]. Width-based planners prioritise search effort on states deemed to be novel. The novelty of a state can be defined in a number of ways. Previously, novelty tests have been obtained from the RAM of the game [5], handcrafted features computed from screen 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
pixels [6] and learnt features extracted from the screen pixels through a NN [8, 9, 10]. In this paper we consider planners with a novelty measure that does not require extensive feature engineering, or the internal state of the simulator, but is instead defined directly over the values of screen pixels.
Recent approaches have combined the RL and planning methods into single agents that are applied to the Atari-2600 games [8, 11, 10]. Junyent et al. [8] combined a width-based planner with a learnt policy defined over a NN in order to guide the planner to promising areas of the search space. The learnt NN was also used to extract features from which the novelty of states were defined over. In this paper we introduce new width-based planning and learning methods that learn both policy and value networks using a methodical learning schedule.
Through analysing previous width-based methods we construct and benchmark new width-based approaches for the Atari-2600 games. We also classify the Atari-2600 games according to their particular characteristics. The resulting game taxonomy helps us to gain insight into the performance of the algorithms we propose and benchmark. The paper contributions are: (1) an analysis of the previous width-based planning methods that have been applied to the Atari-2600 games, (2) introducing new width-based planning and learning approaches for playing the Atari-2600 games, (3) defining a methodical learning schedule for planning and learning methods, and (4) identifying characteristics of the Atari-2600 games that influence the performance of different planning approaches. 2