Vision transformers use [CLS] tokens to predict image classes. Their explainability visualization has been stud-ied using relevant information from [CLS] tokens or fo-cusing on attention scores during self-attention. Such vi-sualization, however, is challenging because of the depen-dence of the structure of a vision transformer on skip con-nections and attention operators, the instability of non-linearities in the learning process, and the limited reflec-tion of self-attention scores on relevance. We argue that the output vectors for each input patch token in a vision trans-former retain the image information of each patch location, which can facilitate the prediction of an image class.In this paper, we propose ICE (Adversarial Normalization: ICan visualize Everything), a novel method that enables a model to directly predict a class for each patch in an im-age; thus, advancing the effective visualization of the ex-plainability of a vision transformer. Our method distin-guishes background from foreground regions by predicting background classes for patches that do not determine im-age classes. We used the DeiT-S model, the most repre-*Both authors contributed equally to this research sentative model employed in studies, on the explainabil-ity visualization of vision transformers. On the ImageNet-Segmentation dataset, ICE outperformed all explainabil-ity visualization methods for four cases depending on the model size. We also conducted quantitative and qualita-tive analyses on the tasks of weakly-supervised object lo-calization and unsupervised object discovery. On the CUB-200-2011 and PASCALVOC07/12 datasets, ICE achieved comparable performance to the state-of-the-art methods.We incorporated ICE into the encoder of DeiT-S and im-proved efficiency by 44.01% on the ImageNet dataset over that achieved by the original DeiT-S model. We showed performance on the accuracy and efficiency comparable to EViT, the state-of-the-art pruning model, demonstrating the effectiveness of ICE. The code is available at https://github.com/Hanyang-HCC-Lab/ICE. 