Video-based person re-identification (Re-ID) is a promi-nent computer vision topic due to its wide range of video surveillance applications. Most existing methods utilize spatial and temporal correlations in frame sequences to obtain discriminative person features. However, inevitable degradation, e.g., motion blur contained in frames, leading to the loss of identity-discriminating cues. Recently, a new bio-inspired sensor called event camera, which can asyn-chronously record intensity changes, brings new vitality to the Re-ID task. With the microsecond resolution and low latency, it can accurately capture the movements of pedes-trians even in the degraded environments. In this work, we propose a Sparse-Dense Complementary Learning (SDCL)Framework, which effectively extracts identity features by fully exploiting the complementary information of dense frames and sparse events. Specifically, for frames, we build a CNN-based module to aggregate the dense features of pedestrian appearance step by step, while for event streams, we design a bio-inspired spiking neural network (SNN) backbone, which encodes event signals into sparse feature maps in a spiking form, to extract the dynamic motion cues of pedestrians. Finally, a cross feature alignment module is constructed to fuse motion information from events and appearance cues from frames to enhance identity represen-tation learning. Experiments on several benchmarks show that by employing events and SNN into Re-ID, our method significantly outperforms competitive methods. The code is available at https://github.com/Chengzhi-Cao/SDCL.∗Corresponding author. This work was supported by the NationalKey R&D Program of China under Grant 2020AAA0105702, the NationalNatural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grants 62225207, 62276243 and U19B2038, the University Synergy Innovation Program ofAnhui Province under Grant GXXT-2019-025.Figure 1. Visual examples of learned feature maps. From top to bottom: (a) original images, (b) corresponding events, (c) feature maps of events, (d) feature maps of frames in PSTA [49] (w/o events), (e) feature maps of frames in our network (w/ events). 