Visual information extraction (VIE) plays an important role in Document Intelligence. Generally, it is divided into two tasks: semantic entity recognition (SER) and rela-tion extraction (RE). Recently, pre-trained models for doc-uments have achieved substantial progress in VIE, partic-ularly in SER. However, most of the existing models learn the geometric representation in an implicit way, which has been found insufficient for the RE task since geometric in-formation is especially crucial for RE. Moreover, we reveal another factor that limits the performance of RE lies in the objective gap between the pre-training phase and the fine-tuning phase for RE. To tackle these issues, we propose in this paper a multi-modal framework, named GeoLay-outLM, for VIE. GeoLayoutLM explicitly models the geo-metric relations in pre-training, which we call geometric pre-training. Geometric pre-training is achieved by three specially designed geometry-related pre-training tasks. Ad-ditionally, novel relation heads, which are pre-trained by the geometric pre-training tasks and fine-tuned for RE, are elaborately designed to enrich and enhance the feature rep-resentation. According to extensive experiments on stan-dard VIE benchmarks, GeoLayoutLM achieves highly com-petitive scores in the SER task and significantly outperforms the previous state-of-the-arts for RE (e.g., the F1 score ofRE on FUNSD is boosted from 80.35% to 89.45%) 1.Figure 1. Incorrect relation predictions by the previous state-of-the-art model LayoutLMv3 [15]. (a) LayoutLMv3 tends to link two entities relying more on their semantics than the geometric layout, i.e., the entity “212-450-4785” is linked to “Fax Number” regardless of their relationship in layout. (b) LayoutLMv3 suc-cessfully predicts the link in the upper half part but misses the link below, although both links are similar in geometric layout. These two examples clearly show the importance of geometric infor-mation in relation extraction (RE).LayoutLMv3+ geometric constraintPrecision Recall 85.45 85.45 75.82 79.87F1 80.35 82.57Table 1. The RE performance improvement by introducing a sim-ple geometric restriction (on the FUNSD dataset). 