Benefiting from masked visual modeling, self-supervised video representation learning has achieved remarkable progress. However, existing methods focus on learning rep-resentations from scratch through reconstructing low-level features like raw pixel values.In this paper, we propose masked video distillation (MVD), a simple yet effective two-stage masked feature modeling framework for video repre-sentation learning: firstly we pretrain an image (or video) model by recovering low-level features of masked patches, then we use the resulting features as targets for masked fea-ture modeling. For the choice of teacher models, we ob-serve that students taught by video teachers perform bet-ter on temporally-heavy video tasks, while image teachers transfer stronger spatial representations for spatially-heavy video tasks. Visualization analysis also indicates different teachers produce different learned patterns for students. To leverage the advantage of different teachers, we design a spatial-temporal co-teaching method for MVD. Specifically, we distill student models from both video teachers and im-age teachers by masked feature modeling. Extensive ex-perimental results demonstrate that video transformers pre-trained with spatial-temporal co-teaching outperform mod-els distilled with a single teacher on a multitude of video datasets. Our MVD with vanilla ViT achieves state-of-the-art performance compared with previous methods on sev-eral challenging video downstream tasks. For example, with the ViT-Large model, our MVD achieves 86.4% and 76.7%Top-1 accuracy on Kinetics-400 and Something-Something-v2, outperforming VideoMAE by 1.2% and 2.4% respec-tively. When a larger ViT-Huge model is adopted, MVD achieves the state-of-the-art performance with 77.3% Top-1 accuracy on Something-Something-v2. Code will be avail-able at https://github.com/ruiwang2021/mvd.†Corresponding authorsFigure 1. Comparisons of MVD with previous supervised or self-supervised methods on Something-Something v2. Each line represents the corresponding model of different sizes. 