Open World Object Detection (OWOD) is a new and challenging computer vision task that bridges the gap be-tween classic object detection (OD) benchmarks and ob-In addition to detecting ject detection in the real world. and classifying seen/labeled objects, OWOD algorithms are expected to detect novel/unknown objects - which can be classiﬁed and incrementally learned. In standard OD, ob-ject proposals not overlapping with a labeled object are automatically classiﬁed as background. Therefore, simply applying OD methods to OWOD fails as unknown objects would be predicted as background. The challenge of detect-ing unknown objects stems from the lack of supervision in distinguishing unknown objects and background object pro-posals. Previous OWOD methods have attempted to over-come this issue by generating supervision using pseudo-labeling - however, unknown object detection has remained low. Probabilistic/generative models may provide a solu-tion for this challenge. Herein, we introduce a novel prob-abilistic framework for objectness estimation, where we al-ternate between probability distribution estimation and ob-jectness likelihood maximization of known objects in the embedded feature space - ultimately allowing us to estimate the objectness probability of different proposals. The result-ing Probabilistic Objectness transformer-based open-world detector, PROB, integrates our framework into traditional object detection models, adapting them for the open-world setting. Comprehensive experiments on OWOD benchmarks show that PROB outperforms all existing OWOD methods in both unknown object detection (∼ 2× unknown recall) and known object detection (∼ 10% mAP). Our code is available at https://github.com/orrzohar/PROB.Figure 1. Comparison of PROB with other open world object de-tectors. (a) Query embeddings are extracted from an image via the deformable DETR model. (b) other open-world detectors at-tempt to directly distinguish between unlabeled ‘hidden’ objects and background without supervision (red). (c) PROB’s scheme of probabilistic objectness training and revised inference, which per-forms alternating optimization of (i) Embeddings distribution es-timation and (ii) likelihood maximization of embeddings that rep-resent known objects. (d) Qualitative examples of the improved unknown object detection of PROB on the MS-COCO test set. 