We propose a novel method called SHS-Net for oriented normal estimation of point clouds by learning signed hyper surfaces, which can accurately predict normals with global consistent orientation from various point clouds. Almost all existing methods estimate oriented normals through a two-stage pipeline, i.e., unoriented normal estimation and normal orientation, and each step is implemented by a sep-arate algorithm. However, previous methods are sensitive to parameter settings, resulting in poor results from point clouds with noise, density variations and complex geome-tries.In this work, we introduce signed hyper surfaces (SHS), which are parameterized by multi-layer perceptron (MLP) layers, to learn to estimate oriented normals from point clouds in an end-to-end manner. The signed hyper surfaces are implicitly learned in a high-dimensional fea-ture space where the local and global information is aggre-gated. Specifically, we introduce a patch encoding mod-ule and a shape encoding module to encode a 3D point cloud into a local latent code and a global latent code, respectively. Then, an attention-weighted normal predic-tion module is proposed as a decoder, which takes the local and global latent codes as input to predict oriented nor-mals. Experimental results show that our SHS-Net out-performs the state-of-the-art methods in both unoriented and oriented normal estimation on the widely used bench-marks. The code, data and pretrained models are available at https://github.com/LeoQLi/SHS-Net.*The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu. This work was supported by National Key R&D Program of China (2022YFC3800600), the Na-tional Natural Science Foundation of China (62272263, 62072268), and in part by Tsinghua-Kuaishou Institute of Future Media Data.Figure 1. We propose SHS-Net to estimate oriented normals di-rectly from point clouds.In contrast, previous studies usually achieve this process through a two-stage paradigm using different algorithms, i.e., (1) unoriented normal estimation (e.g., PCA [19],AdaFit [59] and HSurf-Net [32]) and (2) normal orientation (e.g.,MST [19], QPBO [45] and ODP [38]). 