Abstract 1.

Introduction
Estimating 3D humans from images often produces im-plausible bodies that lean, float, or penetrate the floor. Such methods ignore the fact that bodies are typically supported by the scene. A physics engine can be used to enforce phys-ical plausibility, but these are not differentiable, rely on unrealistic proxy bodies, and are difficult to integrate into ex-isting optimization and learning frameworks. In contrast, we exploit novel intuitive-physics (IP) terms that can be inferred from a 3D SMPL body interacting with the scene. Inspired by biomechanics, we infer the pressure heatmap on the body, the Center of Pressure (CoP) from the heatmap, and the
SMPL body’s Center of Mass (CoM). With these, we develop
IPMAN, to estimate a 3D body from a color image in a “sta-ble” configuration by encouraging plausible floor contact and overlapping CoP and CoM. Our IP terms are intuitive, easy to implement, fast to compute, differentiable, and can be integrated into existing optimization and regression methods.
We evaluate IPMAN on standard datasets and MoYo, a new dataset with synchronized multi-view images, ground-truth 3D bodies with complex poses, body-floor contact, CoM and pressure. IPMAN produces more plausible results than the state of the art, improving accuracy for static poses, while not hurting dynamic ones. Code and data are available for research at https://ipman.is.tue.mpg.de.
* This work was mostly performed at MPI-IS.
To understand humans and their actions, computers need automatic methods to reconstruct the body in 3D. Typi-cally, the problem entails estimating the 3D human pose and shape (HPS) from one or more color images. State-of-the-art (SOTA) methods [46, 51, 75, 102] have made rapid progress, estimating 3D humans that align well with image features in the camera view. Unfortunately, the camera view can be deceiving. When viewed from other directions, or when placed in a 3D scene, the estimated bodies are often physically implausible: they lean, hover, or penetrate the ground (see Fig. 1 top). This is because most SOTA methods reason about humans in isolation; they ignore that people move in a scene, interact with it, and receive physical sup-port by contacting it. This is a deal-breaker for inherently 3D applications, such as biomechanics, augmented/virtual reality (AR/VR) and the “metaverse”; these need humans to be reconstructed faithfully and physically plausibly with re-spect to the scene. For this, we need a method that estimates the 3D human on a ground plane from a color image in a configuration that is physically “stable”.
This is naturally related to reasoning about physics and support. There exist many physics simulators [10, 30, 60] for games, movies, or industrial simulations, and using these for plausible HPS estimation is increasingly popular [66, 74, 96].
However, existing simulators come with two significant
problems: (1) They are typically non-differentiable black boxes, making them incompatible with existing optimiza-tion and learning frameworks. Consequently, most meth-ods [64, 95, 96] use them with reinforcement learning to evaluate whether a certain input has the desired outcome, but with no ability to reason about how changing inputs af-fects the outputs. (2) They rely on an unrealistic proxy body model for computational efficiency; bodies are represented as groups of rigid 3D shape primitives. Such proxy models are crude approximations of human bodies, which, in reality, are much more complex and deform non-rigidly when they move and interact. Moreover, proxies need a priori known body dimensions that are kept fixed during simulation. Also, these proxies differ significantly from the 3D body mod-els [41, 54, 92] used by SOTA HPS methods. Thus, current physics simulators are too limited for use in HPS.
What we need, instead, is a solution that is fully differen-tiable, uses a realistic body model, and seamlessly integrates physical reasoning into HPS methods (both optimization-and regression-based). To this end, instead of using full physics simulation, we introduce novel intuitive-physics (IP) terms that are simple, differentiable, and compatible with a body model like SMPL [54]. Specifically, we define terms that exploit an inferred pressure heatmap of the body on the ground plane, the Center of Pressure (CoP) that arises from the heatmap, and the SMPL body’s Center of Mass (CoM) projected on the floor; see Fig. 2 for a visualization. Intu-itively, bodies whose CoM lie close to their CoP are more stable than ones with a CoP that is further away (see Fig. 5); the former suggests a static pose, e.g. standing or holding a yoga pose, while the latter a dynamic pose, e.g., walking.
We use these intuitive-physics terms in two ways. First, we incorporate them in an objective function that extends
SMPLify-XMC [59] to optimize for body poses that are stable. We also incorporate the same terms in the training loss for an HPS regressor, called IPMAN (Intuitive-Physics-based huMAN). In both formulations, the intuitive-physics terms encourage estimates of body shape and pose that have sufficient ground contact, while penalizing interpenetration and encouraging an overlap of the CoP and CoM.
Our intuitive-physics formulation is inspired by work in biomechanics [32, 33, 61], which characterizes the stability of humans in terms of relative positions between the CoP, the CoM, and the Base of Support (BoS). The BoS is de-fined as the convex hull of all contact regions on the floor (Fig. 2). Following past work [6,71,74], we use the “inverted pendulum” model [85, 86] for body balance; this considers poses as stable if the gravity-projected CoM onto the floor lies inside the BoS. Similar ideas are explored by Scott et al. [71] but they focus on predicting a foot pressure heatmap from 2D or 3D body joints. We go significantly further to exploit stability in training an HPS regressor. This requires two technical novelties.
Figure 2. (1) A SMPL mesh sitting. (2) The inferred pressure map on the ground (color-coded heatmap), CoP (green), CoM (pink), and Base of Support (BoS, yellow polygon). (3) Segmentation of
SMPL into NP = 10 parts, used for computing CoM; see Sec. 3.2.
The first involves computing CoM. To this end, we uni-formly sample points on SMPL’s surface, and calculate each body part’s volume. Then, we compute CoM as the average of all uniformly sampled points weighted by the correspond-ing part volumes. We denote this as pCoM, standing for
“part-weighted CoM”. Importantly, pCoM takes into account
SMPL’s shape, pose, and all blend shapes, while it is also computationally efficient and differentiable.
The second involves estimating CoP directly from the image, without access to a pressure sensor. Our key insight is that the soft tissues of human bodies deform under pressure, e.g., the buttocks deform when sitting. However, SMPL does not model this deformation; it penetrates the ground instead of deforming. We use the penetration depth as a proxy for pressure [68]; deeper penetration means higher pressure. With this, we estimate a pressure field on SMPL’s mesh and compute the CoP as the pressure-weighted average of the surface points. Again this is differentiable.
For evaluation, we use a standard HPS benchmark (Human3.6M [37]), but also the RICH [35] dataset. How-ever, these datasets have limited interactions with the floor.
We thus capture a novel dataset, MoYo, of challenging yoga poses, with synchronized multi-view video, ground-truth
SMPL-X [63] meshes, pressure sensor measurements, and body CoM. IPMAN, in both of its forms, and across all datasets, produces more accurate and stable 3D bodies than the state of the art. Importantly, we find that IPMAN im-proves accuracy for static poses, while not hurting dynamic ones. This makes IPMAN applicable to everyday motions.
To summarize: (1) We develop IPMAN, the first HPS method that integrates intuitive physics. (2) We infer biome-chanical properties such as CoM, CoP and body pressure. (3) We define novel intuitive-physics terms that can be easily integrated into HPS methods. (4) We create MoYo, a dataset that uniquely has complex poses, multi-view video, and ground-truth bodies, pressure, and CoM. (5) We show that our IP terms improve HPS accuracy and physical plausibility. (6) Data and code are available for research. 2.