Abstract
As a fundamental problem in computer vision, 3D point cloud registration (PCR) aims to seek the optimal pose to align a point cloud pair. In this paper, we present a 3D reg-istration method with maximal cliques (MAC). The key in-sight is to loosen the previous maximum clique constraint, and mine more local consensus information in a graph for accurate pose hypotheses generation: 1) A compatibility graph is constructed to render the affinity relationship be-tween initial correspondences. 2) We search for maximal cliques in the graph, each of which represents a consensus set. We perform node-guided clique selection then, where each node corresponds to the maximal clique with the great-est graph weight. 3) Transformation hypotheses are com-puted for the selected cliques by the SVD algorithm and the best hypothesis is used to perform registration. Ex-tensive experiments on U3M, 3DMatch, 3DLoMatch and
KITTI demonstrate that MAC effectively increases registra-tion accuracy, outperforms various state-of-the-art meth-ods and boosts the performance of deep-learned methods.
MAC combined with deep-learned methods achieves state-of-the-art registration recall of 95.7% / 78.9% on 3DMatch
/ 3DLoMatch. 1.

Introduction
Point cloud registration (PCR) is an important and fun-damental problem in 3D computer vision and has a wide range of applications in localization [13], 3D object detec-tion [17] and 3D reconstruction [25]. Given two 3D scans of the same object (or scene), the goal of PCR is to estimate a six-degree-of-freedom (6-DoF) pose transformation that accurately aligns the two input point clouds. Using point-to-point feature correspondences is a popular and robust so-lution to the PCR problem. However, due to the limita-tions of existing 3D keypoint detectors & descriptors, the limited overlap between point clouds and data noise, corre-*Corresponding author.
Code will be available at https://github.com/zhangxy0517/ 3D-Registration-with-Maximal-Cliques.
Figure 1. Comparison of maximal and maximum cliques on a low overlapping point cloud pair. Maximal cliques (MAC) effec-tively choose the optimal 6-DoF transformation hypothesis with low rotation error (RE) and translation error (TE) for two point clouds with a low inlier ratio, while the maximum clique fails in this case. spondences generated by feature matching usually contain outliers, resulting in great challenges to accurate 3D regis-tration.
The problem of 3D registration by handling correspon-dences with outliers has been studied for decades. We classify them into geometric-only and deep-learned meth-ods. For geometric-only methods [5, 6, 21, 30, 31, 38–41], random sample consensus (RANSAC) and its variants per-form an iterative sampling strategy for registration. Al-though RANSAC-based methods are simple and efficient, their performance is highly vulnerable when the outlier rate increases, and it requires a large number of iterations to ob-tain acceptable results. Also, a series of global registra-tion methods based on branch-and-bound (BnB) are pro-posed to search the 6D parameter space and obtain the op-timal global solution. The main weakness of these meth-ods is the high computational complexity, especially when the correspondence set is of a large magnitude and has an extremely high outlier rate. For deep-learned methods, some [1–4, 9, 10, 14, 16, 18, 19, 27, 35] focus on improving
one module in the registration process, such as investigating more discriminate keypoint feature descriptors or more ef-fective correspondence selection techniques, while the oth-ers [22, 29, 43] focus on registration in an end-to-end man-ner. However, deep-learned based methods require a large amount of data for training and usually lack generalization on different datasets. At present, it is still very challenging to achieve accurate registrations in the presence of heavy outliers and in cross-dataset conditions.
In this paper, we propose a geometric-only 3D registra-tion method based on maximal cliques (MAC). The key in-sight is to loosen the previous maximum clique constraint, and mine more local consensus information in a graph to generate accurate pose hypotheses. We first model the ini-tial correspondence set as a compatibility graph, where each node represents a single correspondence and each edge be-tween two nodes indicates a pair of compatible correspon-dences. Second, we search for maximal cliques in the graph and then use node-guided clique filtering to match each graph node with the appropriate maximal clique containing it. Compared with the maximum clique, MAC is a looser constraint and is able to mine more local information in a graph. This helps us to achieve plenty of correct hypothe-ses from a graph. Finally, transformation hypotheses are computed for the selected cliques by the SVD algorithm.
The best hypothesis is selected to perform registration us-ing popular hypothesis evaluation metrics in the RANSAC family. To summarize, our main contributions are as fol-lows:
• We introduce a hypothesis generation method named
MAC. Our MAC method is able to mine more local information in a graph, compared with the previous maximum clique constraint. We demonstrate that hy-potheses generated by MAC are of high accuracy even in the presence of heavy outliers.
• Based on MAC, we present a novel PCR method, which achieves state-of-the-art performance on U3M, 3DMatch, 3DLoMatch and KITTI datasets. Notably, our geometric-only MAC method outperforms several state-of-the-art deep learning methods [3, 9, 19, 27].
MAC can also be inserted as a module into multiple deep-learned frameworks [1, 10, 18, 29, 43] to boost their performance. MAC combined with GeoTrans-former achieves the state-of-the-art registration recall of 95.7% / 78.9% on 3DMatch / 3DLoMatch. 2.