Abstract
Most recent methods formulate the task of human pose estimation as a heatmap estimation problem, and use the overall L2 loss computed from the entire heatmap to opti-mize the heatmap prediction. In this paper, we show that in bottom-up human pose estimation where each heatmap often contains multiple body joints, using the overall L2 loss to optimize the heatmap prediction may not be the op-timal choice. This is because, minimizing the overall L2 loss cannot always lead the model to locate all the body joints across different sub-regions of the heatmap more ac-curately. To cope with this problem, from a novel perspec-tive, we propose a new bottom-up human pose estimation method that optimizes the heatmap prediction via minimiz-ing the distance between two characteristic functions re-spectively constructed from the predicted heatmap and the groundtruth heatmap. Our analysis presented in this pa-per indicates that the distance between these two charac-teristic functions is essentially the upper bound of the L2 losses w.r.t. sub-regions of the predicted heatmap. There-fore, via minimizing the distance between the two character-istic functions, we can optimize the model to provide a more accurate localization result for the body joints in different sub-regions of the predicted heatmap. We show the effec-tiveness of our proposed method through extensive exper-iments on the COCO dataset and the CrowdPose dataset. 1.

Introduction
Human pose estimation aims to locate the body joints of each person in a given RGB image. It is relevant to vari-ous applications, such as action recognition [7, 43], person
Re-ID [28], and human object interaction [35]. For tack-ling human pose estimation, most of the recent methods fall
*Corresponding Author into two major categories: top-down methods and bottom-up methods. Top-down methods [24,32,33,39,44] generally use a human detector to detect all the people in the image, and then perform single-person pose estimation for each
In contrast, bottom-up meth-detected subject separately. ods [5, 6, 16, 17, 22, 23, 25, 26] usually locate the body joints of all people in the image at the same time. Hence, bottom-up methods, the main focus of this paper, are often a more efficient choice compared to top-down methods, especially when there are many people in the input image [5].
. 2 2
In existing works, it is common to regard human pose estimation as a heatmap prediction problem, since this can preserve the spatial structure of the input image throughout the encoding and decoding process [12]. During the gen-eral optimization process, the groundtruth (GT) heatmaps
Hg are first constructed via putting 2D Gaussian blobs cen-tered at the GT coordinates of the body joints. After that, these constructed GT heatmaps are used to supervise the predicted heatmaps Hp via the overall L2 loss Loverall cal-culated (averaged) over the whole heatmap. Specifically, denoting the area of the heatmap as A, we have Loverall
=
∥Hp−Hg∥2 2
A
We argue that using the overall L2 loss to supervise the predicted heatmap may not be the optimal choice in bottom-up methods where each heatmap often contains multiple body joints from the multiple people in various sub-regions, as shown in Fig. 1(b). This is because, a smaller overall L2 loss calculated over the whole heatmap cannot always lead the model to locate all the body joints across different sub-regions in the heatmap more accurately. As illustrated in
Fig. 1(a), the predicted heatmap #2 has a smaller overall L2 loss compared to the predicted heatmap #1. However, the predicted heatmap #2 locates the body joint in the top-right sub-region wrongly, whereas the predicted heatmap
#1 locates body joints in both the top-right and bottom-left sub-regions correctly. This is because, while the de-crease of the overall L2 loss can be achieved when the L2 loss w.r.t. each sub-region either decreases or remains the
Figure 1. (a) Illustration of heatmaps. The predicted heatmap #2 with a smaller overall L2 loss locates the body joint in the top-right sub-region wrongly, while the predicted heatmap #1 with a larger overall L2 loss locates body joints in both the top-right and bottom-left sub-regions correctly. (b) Output of a commonly used bottom-up method, HrHRNet-W32 [6]. As shown, it misses left ankle in the dashed sub-region of image (i) completely, and misidentifies right knee in the dashed sub-region of image (ii). This indicates that accurately localizing the body joints of multiple people in a single heatmap is a challenging problem. (Best viewed in color.) same (e.g., from predicted heatmap #0 to predicted heatmap
#1), it can also be achieved when there is a decrease of L2 loss w.r.t. certain sub-regions and an increase of L2 loss for some other sub-regions (e.g., from predicted heatmap #1 to predicted heatmap #2). This indicates that, in bottom-up methods, the decrease of the overall L2 loss does not al-ways lead to a more accurate localization result for the body joints in different sub-regions of the predicted heatmap at the same time. Besides, we also show some results of a commonly used bottom-up method, HrHRNet-W32 [6], in
Fig. 1(b). As shown, it may even miss or misidentify certain body joints when there are a number of people in the input image. This indicates that it is quite difficult to accurately locate all body joints of all people in the predicted heatmap.
To tackle the above-mentioned problem in bottom-up methods, in this paper, rather than using the overall L2 loss to supervise the whole heatmap, we instead aim to optimize the body joints over sub-regions of the predicted heatmap at the same time. To this end, from a new perspective, we ex-press the predicted and GT heatmaps as characteristic func-tions, and minimize the difference between these functions, allowing different sub-regions of the predicted heatmap to be optimized at the same time.
More specifically, we first construct two distributions re-spectively from the predicted heatmap and the GT heatmap.
After that, we obtain two characteristic functions of these two distributions and optimize the heatmap prediction via minimizing the distance between these two characteristic functions. We analyze in Sec. 3.3 that the distance between the two characteristic functions is the upper bound of the
L2 losses w.r.t sub-regions in the predicted heatmap. There-fore, via minimizing the distance between the two charac-teristic functions, our method can locate body joints in dif-ferent sub-regions more accurately at the same time, and thus achieve superior performance.
The contributions of our work are summarized as fol-lows. 1) From a new perspective, we supervise the pre-dicted heatmap using the distance between the character-istic functions of the predicted and GT heatmaps. 2) We analyze (in Sec. 3.3) that the L2 losses w.r.t. sub-regions of the predicted heatmap are upper-bounded by the dis-tance between the characteristic functions. 3) Our proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance on the evalu-ation benchmarks [19, 21]. 2.