Abstract
Recently, deep learning based approaches have shown promising results in 3D hand reconstruction from a single
RGB image. These approaches can be roughly divided into model-based approaches, which are heavily dependent on the model’s parameter space, and model-free approaches, which require large numbers of 3D ground truths to reduce depth ambiguity and struggle in weakly-supervised scenar-ios. To overcome these issues, we propose a novel proba-bilistic model to achieve the robustness of model-based ap-proaches and reduced dependence on the model’s param-eter space of model-free approaches. The proposed prob-abilistic model incorporates a model-based network as a prior-net to estimate the prior probability distribution of joints and vertices. An Attention-based Mesh Vertices Un-certainty Regression (AMVUR) model is proposed to cap-ture dependencies among vertices and the correlation be-tween joints and mesh vertices to improve their feature rep-resentation. We further propose a learning based occlusion-aware Hand Texture Regression model to achieve high-fidelity texture reconstruction. We demonstrate the flexibil-ity of the proposed probabilistic model to be trained in both supervised and weakly-supervised scenarios. The experi-mental results demonstrate our probabilistic model’s state-of-the-art accuracy in 3D hand and texture reconstruction from a single image in both training schemes, including in the presence of severe occlusions. 1.

Introduction 3D hand shape and texture reconstruction from a sin-gle RGB image is a challenging problem that has numerous applications such as human-machine interaction [1, 2], vir-tual and augmented reality [3–6], and sign language transla-tion [7]. In recent years, there has been significant progress in reconstructing 3D hand pose and shape from a monocular images [8–16]. These approaches can be generally catego-rized into model-based and model-free approaches. Model-based approaches [9,13–15] utilize a parametric model such as MANO [17] and train a network to regress its paramet-ric representation in terms of shape and pose. Since the parametric model contains priors of human hands, these ap-proaches are robust to environment variations and weakly-supervised training [12]. However, the shape and pose regression is constrained by the parametric model that is learned from the limited hand exemplars [8].
In contrast, model-free approaches [8, 11, 12, 16] regress the coordinates of 3D hand joints and mesh directly instead of using parametric models. Despite the remarkable results they have achieved, there are several limitations. For exam-ple, Graph-CNN is used by [8, 11] to model neighborhood vertex-vertex interactions, but such models cannot capture long range dependencies among vertices. Although [12] has addressed this issue by employing self-attention mecha-nism, it does not distinguish joints and vertices, processing them together in a same self-attention module. Moreover none of these works can support weakly supervised training and often require a large amount of 3D annotations of both joints and vertices to reduce depth ambiguity in monocular 3D reconstruction [18].
Motivated by the above observations, our first goal is to combine the benefits of the model-based and model-free approaches. To this end, we develop a probabilistic method that incorporates the MANO model into a prior-net to estimate the prior probability distribution of joints and vertices instead of using deterministic settings as pre-vious approaches have done. To relax the solution space of the MANO model, an Attention-based Mesh Vertices Un-certainty Regression model (AMVUR) is proposed to es-timate the conditioned probability distribution of the joints and vertices. In AMVUR, to improve feature representation of joints and vertices, a cross-attention model is proposed to capture the correlation between 3D positional encoded joints and mesh vertices, followed by a self-attention model for capturing the short/long range dependencies among mesh vertices. With the proposed architecture, the AMVUR model can be jointly trained with the prior-net to achieve superior performance to using them independently. To the 1
best of our knowledge, our probabilistic attention model is the first approach that learns the probability distribution of hand joints and mesh under a probabilistic model.
The ability to reconstruct 3D hands with high-fidelity texture is helpful for 3D Hand Personalization and improves the performance of hand tracking systems [19–21]. More-over, Hand texture reconstruction is important for the user experience and bodily self-consciousness in immersive vir-tual reality systems [3]. We thus propose a learning based occlusion-aware hand texture regression model by introduc-ing an occlusion-aware rasterization and reverse interpola-tion to achieve high-fidelity hand texture reconstruction.
Our contributions are summarized as follows: (1) We introduce an Attention-based Mesh Vertices Uncertainty
Regression model (AMVUR) comprising a cross attention module for capturing the correlation between joints and mesh vertices and a self-attention module for capturing the (2) short/long range dependencies among mesh vertices.
We propose a novel probabilistic attention model to learn the probability distribution of hand joints and mesh ver-tices, where the MANO parametric model is regarded as a prior-net and jointly trained with AMVUR. (3) We propose an Occlusion-aware Hand Texture Regression model to achieve high-fidelity hand texture reconstruction, including in the presence of severe occlusions. (4) We demonstrate that our network can be trained in both fully supervised and weakly supervised training schemes, achieving state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance on the three benchmark 3D hand reconstruction datasets: HO3Dv2 [22], HO3Dv3 [23] and
FreiHand [24]. 2.