Abstract
Neuron reconstruction in a full adult fly brain from high-resolution electron microscopy (EM) data is regarded as a cornerstone for neuroscientists to explore how neurons in-spire intelligence. As the central part of neurons, somas in the full brain indicate the origin of neurogenesis and neu-ral functions. However, due to the absence of EM datasets specifically annotated for somas, existing deep learning-based neuron reconstruction methods cannot directly pro-vide accurate soma distribution and morphology. More-over, full brain neuron reconstruction remains extremely time-consuming due to the unprecedentedly large size of
EM data. In this paper, we develop an efficient soma re-construction method for obtaining accurate soma distribu-tion and morphology information in a full adult fly brain.
To this end, we first make a high-resolution EM dataset with fine-grained 3D manual annotations on somas. Re-lying on this dataset, we propose an efficient, two-stage deep learning algorithm for predicting accurate locations and boundaries of 3D soma instances. Further, we deploy a parallelized, high-throughput data processing pipeline for executing the above algorithm on the full brain. Finally, we provide quantitative and qualitative benchmark compar-isons on the testset to validate the superiority of the pro-posed method, as well as preliminary statistics of the re-constructed somas in the full adult fly brain from the bi-ological perspective. We release our code and dataset at https://github.com/liuxy1103/EMADS. 1.

Introduction
Drosophila melanogaster, also known as the fruit fly, is an organism with intelligent behaviors including percep-tion, learning, and judgment [10, 34, 36]. It has a complete and relatively simple neural system [6, 37]. The interac-tions among neurons in the system guide the drosophila’s intelligent behaviors [8, 14, 23, 35]. Therefore, the study
*Corresponding author. of drosophila neurons, which has fascinated neuroscientists for more than a century [5, 7, 16, 40, 44], has key implica-tions for understanding how the brains of living organisms produce intelligence [2, 41].
As the central part of the neuron, the soma maintains the neuron structure and controls the formation of neu-rites [22, 30]. Studies have shown that the location and morphology of somas in the full brain are related to neural development and the neural logic function [3, 17], and the number of somas is related to the complexity of the brain and the age of the living body [1, 25]. Therefore, it is of great biological significance to investigate soma reconstruc-tion in the full brain of model organisms such as drosophila.
Traditional studies in this field are mainly based on brain images collected by optical microscopies [13, 38]. The soma structure is first stained with specific staining proteins, and the confocal images collected could show fluorescence staining signals, so as to obtain the soma distribution of the full brain of drosophila. However, the resolution of con-focal images is low, making it difficult to obtain the exact morphology of each soma. Based on the assumption that each cell has only one nucleus, the isotropic fractionator method [15, 18] is used to obtain the number of somas in the full brain of drosophila. This method destroys the brain structure during the production of cell suspension, so the distribution of somas in the full brain cannot be obtained. scanning technology,
Recently, with the development of high-speed elec-tron microscopy (EM) high-resolution EM image datasets of different species including drosophila [42], mouse [31], and human [39] have been successfully acquired, and the full adult fly brain (FAFB) dataset [47] imaged from a complete drosophila brain can be regarded as a representative. Based on these datasets, advanced deep learning algorithms are developed to auto-matically reconstruct neurons [12, 23] and cell nucleus [32] in EM images for connectomics study. Meanwhile, parallel and distributed data processing pipelines [39, 46] are proposed to deploy these algorithms on large-scale EM datasets. However, due to the lack of high-resolution EM datasets specifically annotated for somas, existing works
cannot directly provide accurate soma distribution and morphology information.
In this paper, we make one of the first efforts to develop an efficient soma reconstruction method in a full adult fly brain, aiming to obtain accurate soma distribution and mor-phology information for this model organism. The contri-butions of this work are four aspects:
• We make a high-resolution EM soma dataset with fine-grained 3D manual annotations for more than 8 × 109 voxels. To the best of our knowledge, this dataset is the first of its kind.
• Relying on the above dataset, we propose an effi-cient, two-stage deep learning algorithm for soma in-stance segmentation, and benchmark existing alterna-tive methods to validate the superiority of ours.
• We deploy a parallelized, high-throughput data pro-cessing pipeline for executing our algorithm on the full brain, fulfilling the soma reconstruction task on a 90-GPU cluster within 4 days.
• We provide quantitative and qualitative results for eval-uating the accuracy and efficiency of the proposed method, along with preliminary statistics of the re-constructed somas in the full adult fly brain, including count, size, distribution and morphology.
We believe our work will contribute to the study of the drosophila neural system. The benchmark dataset has been released to facilitate future research along this line. Code and a 4K video of the full brain reconstruction result are now available through the links provided in Github website. 2.