Abstract
Modern displays and contents support more than 8bits image and video. However, bit-starving situations such as compression codecs make low bit-depth (LBD) images (<8bits), occurring banding and blurry artifacts. Previous bit depth expansion (BDE) methods still produce unsatis-factory high bit-depth (HBD) images. To this end, we pro-pose an implicit neural function with a bit query to recover de-quantized images from arbitrarily quantized inputs. We develop a phasor estimator to exploit the information of the nearest pixels. Our method shows superior performance against prior BDE methods on natural and animation im-ages. We also demonstrate our model on YouTube UGC datasets for de-banding. Our source code is available at https://github.com/WooKyoungHan/ABCD 1.

Introduction
The bit depth in digital contents means a number of bi-nary digits representing pixel values. As humans recognize a wide range of color and luminance, modern display de-vices and cameras support more than the 8-bit depth of im-age and video [21, 28]. Regardless of these efforts, the im-age and video codecs enforce HBD images to be quantized into LBD images due to bit starvation. Thus, most contents are under 8 bits leading to false contours and blurry arti-facts. Bit depth expansion, a.k.a. de-quantization, aims to recover missing bits caused by such quantizations.
Conventional methods such as [6, 10, 19, 24, 36–38] have been proposed for the de-quantization problem. How-ever, these methods suffer from blurry artifacts resulting in distortions of details or false contours in extreme BDE.
Recently, learning-based approaches, a.k.a. deep neural network, have shown remarkable performances in BDE
[4, 9, 18, 26, 32, 40, 43]. Most learning-based approaches
[4, 9, 32, 40, 43] reconstruct HBD images in an end-to-end manner. Recent methods [18, 26] recover residual compo-nents corresponding to missing bits from LBD images. In particular, the method called D16 [26], with the best per-*Corresponding author.
Figure 1. Overview of arbitrary bit-depth expansion (dequan-tization) using ABCD. Our ABCD estimates dominant phasors of images and calculates the bit-query of LBD. Then, an MLP takes the estimated phasor information and bit-wise query (s) to predict the bit-wise coefficient ( (cid:98)C) of HBD images. formance so far, conducts a binary classification per each bit plane. However, D16 requires multiple deep neural net-works models for every bit-planes.
Recently, an implicit neural representation (INR) which maps coordinates into signal values [25, 29], shows promis-ing performances in various tasks [5, 11, 15, 22, 25, 29].
The implicit neural networks have a spectral bias prob-lem toward low frequencies, which makes INR hard to represent high-frequency components [27]. Fortunately, several solutions are developed to relax the spectral bias
[15, 23, 30, 33, 41]. However, there is no INR approach for bit depth expansion problems.
In this paper, we propose a novel model, the Arbitrary
Bit-wise Coefficient model for De-quantization (ABCD), to recover missing bits from the randomly quantized LBD im-age to any HBD image. The proposed model addresses the spectral bias of INR and improves de-quantization quality through the use of an encoder to estimate the dominant pha-sors in the ground truth. As shown in Fig. 1, our encoder es-timates the dominant phasors to mitigate the spectral bias of
INR. Then, the model utilizes an INR to achieve arbitrary-bit reconstructions in the amplitude domain. Finally, a bit
D16 [26]
Figure 2. Visual demonstration 3-bit to 8-bit de-quantization: input, deep network approach (D16 [26]), and our method. The neural network method [26] reduces severe false contours of input, but false contours still remain. Our ABCD removes such artifacts, clearly.
ABCD(Ours)
Input decoding step converts bit coefficients into HBD images by multiplying the bit-basis. The proposed model represents a significant advancement over previous de-quantization techniques with providing high flexibility and accuracy as it effectively recovers missing bits from randomly quantized inputs.
In summary, our main contributions are as follows:
• We propose a bit depth expansion algorithm using an implicit neural representation with a bit query in arbi-trarily quantized bit levels and demonstrate our method achieves state-of-the-art performance.
• We show that the proposed phasor estimator predicts the dominant phasors of the ground truth coefficient’ in the Fourier domain.
• We validate our pre-trained model not only on five image datasets as de-quantization but also on the
YouTube-UGC dataset as de-banding. 2.