Abstract Visual Reasoning: An Algebraic Approach for Solving Raven’s
Progressive Matrices
Jingyi Xu1∗ Tushar Vaidya2◦∗ Yufei Wu2◦* Saket Chandra1 Zhangsheng Lai3◦ Kai Fong Ernest Chong1† 1Singapore University of Technology and Design 2Nanyang Technological University 3Singapore Polytechnic jingyi xu@mymail.sutd.edu.sg tushar.vaidya@ntu.edu.sg yufei002@e.ntu.edu.sg lai zhangsheng@sp.edu.sg
{saket chandra,ernest chong}@sutd.edu.sg
Abstract
We introduce algebraic machine reasoning, a new rea-soning framework that is well-suited for abstract reasoning.
Effectively, algebraic machine reasoning reduces the diffi-cult process of novel problem-solving to routine algebraic computation. The fundamental algebraic objects of interest are the ideals of some suitably initialized polynomial ring.
We shall explain how solving Raven’s Progressive Matri-ces (RPMs) can be realized as computational problems in algebra, which combine various well-known algebraic sub-routines that include: Computing the Gr¨obner basis of an ideal, checking for ideal containment, etc. Crucially, the additional algebraic structure satisfied by ideals allows for more operations on ideals beyond set-theoretic operations.
Our algebraic machine reasoning framework is not only able to select the correct answer from a given answer set, but also able to generate the correct answer with only the question matrix given. Experiments on the I-RAVEN dataset yield an overall 93.2% accuracy, which significantly out-performs the current state-of-the-art accuracy of 77.0% and exceeds human performance at 84.4% accuracy. 1.

Introduction
When we think of machine reasoning, nothing captures our imagination more than the possibility that machines would eventually surpass humans in intelligence tests and general reasoning tasks. Even for humans, to excel in IQ tests, such as the well-known Raven’s progressive matrices (RPMs) [5], is already a non-trivial feat. A typical RPM instance is composed of a question matrix and an answer set; see Fig. 1. A question matrix is a 3 × 3 grid of panels
*Equal contributions. † Corresponding author.
◦ This work was done when the author was previously at SUTD.
Code: https://github.com/Xu-Jingyi/AlgebraicMR
Figure 1. An example of RPM instance from the I-RAVEN dataset.
The correct answer is marked with a red box. that satisfy certain hidden rules, where the first 8 panels are filled with geometric entities, and the 9-th panel is “miss-ing”. The goal is to infer the correct answer for this last panel from among the 8 panels in the given answer set.
The ability to solve RPMs is the quintessential display of what cognitive scientists call fluid intelligence. The word
“fluid” alludes to the mental agility of discovering new re-lations and abstractions [28], especially for solving novel problems not encountered before. Thus, it is not surprising that abstract reasoning on novel problems is widely hailed as the hallmark of human intelligence [6].
Although there has been much recent progress in ma-chine reasoning [15, 17, 30–33, 37, 38, 46, 47], a common criticism [9, 25, 26] is that existing reasoning frameworks have focused on approaches involving extensive training, even when solving well-established reasoning tests such as
RPMs. Perhaps most pertinently, as [9] argues, reasoning tasks such as RPMs should not need task-specific perfor-This work is supported by the National Research Foundation, Sin-gapore under its AI Singapore Program (AISG Award No: AISG-RP-2019-015) and under its NRFF Program (NRFFAI1-2019-0005), and by
Ministry of Education, Singapore, under its Tier 2 Research Fund (MOE-T2EP20221-0016).
Figure 2. An overview of our algebraic machine reasoning framework, organized into 2 stages. mance optimization. After all, if a machine optimizes per-formance by training on task-specific data, then that task cannot possibly be novel to the machine.
To better emulate human reasoning, we propose what we call “algebraic machine reasoning”, a new reasoning frame-work that is well-suited for abstract reasoning. Our frame-work solves RPMs without needing to optimize for perfor-mance on task-specific data, analogous to how a gifted child solves RPMs without needing practice on RPMs. Our key starting point is to define concepts as ideals of some suitably initialized polynomial ring. These ideals are treated as the
“actual objects of study” in algebraic machine reasoning, which do not require any numerical values to be assigned to them. We shall elucidate how the RPM task can be realized as a computational problem in algebra involving ideals.
Our reasoning framework can be broadly divided into two stages: (1) algebraic representation, and (2) algebraic machine reasoning; see Fig. 2. In the first stage, we rep-resent RPM panels as ideals, based on perceptual attribute values extracted from object detection models. In the sec-ond stage, we propose 4 invariance modules to extract pat-terns from the RPM question matrix.
To summarize, our main contributions are as follows:
• We reduce “solving the RPM task” to “solving a computational problem in algebra”. Specifically, we present how the discovery of abstract patterns can be realized very concretely as algebraic computations known as primary decompositions of ideals.
• In our algebraic machine reasoning framework, we in-troduce 4 invariance modules for extracting patterns that are meaningful to humans.
• Our framework is not only able to select the correct an-swer from a given answer set, but also able to generate answers without needing any given answer set.
• Experiments conducted on RAVEN and I-RAVEN datasets demonstrate that our reasoning framework significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods. 2.