Abstract
Recently, deep neural networks have been successfully applied for image restoration (IR) (e.g., super-resolution, de-noising, de-blurring). Despite their promising perfor-mance, running IR networks requires heavy computation.
A large body of work has been devoted to addressing this issue by designing novel neural networks or pruning their parameters. However, the common limitation is that while images are saved in a compressed format before being en-hanced by IR, prior work does not consider the impact of compression on the IR quality.
In this paper, we present AccelIR, a framework that optimizes image compression considering the end-to-end pipeline of IR tasks. AccelIR encodes an image through
IR-aware compression that optimizes compression levels across image blocks within an image according to the im-pact on the IR quality. Then, it runs a lightweight IR net-work on the compressed image, effectively reducing IR com-putation, while maintaining the same IR quality and image size. Our extensive evaluation using nine IR networks shows that AccelIR can reduce the computing overhead of super-resolution, de-nosing, and de-blurring by 49%, 29%, and 32% on average, respectively. 1.

Introduction
Image restoration (IR) is a class of techniques that re-covers a high-quality image from a lower-quality counter-part (e.g., super-resolution, de-noising, de-blurring). With the advances of deep learning, IR has been widely deployed in various applications such as satellite/medical image en-hancement [9,42,43,51,52], facial recognition [7,44,65,69], and video streaming/analytics [15, 27, 66, 67, 70]. Mean-the resolution of images used in these applica-while, tions has been rapidly increasing along with the evolution in client devices (e.g., smartphones [58, 61], TV moni-tors [57]). Thus, deep neural networks (DNNs) used for
IR need to support higher-resolution images such as 4K (4096×2160) and even 8K (7680×4320).
However, because the computing and memory overhead
Task
Super-resolution
De-noising
De-blurring
JPEG + IR
AccelIR
PSNR
PSNR
FLOPs 1165G 25.28dB 25.30dB 1701G 30.49dB 1132G 30.70dB 2590G 30.57dB 1718G 30.58dB
FLOPs 298G
Table 1. Computing overhead and quality of IR under the same compression ratio (1.2bpp). AccelIR reduces computation by 34-74% while providing the same IR quality and image size. grow quadratically to the input resolution, applying IR net-works to such a large image is computationally expen-sive [32, 34]. Prior work addresses this issue using three different approaches: 1) designing efficient feature extrac-tion or up-scaling layers [2, 16, 29, 33, 59, 75], 2) adjusting network complexities within an image according to the IR difficulty [32, 34], and 3) pruning network parameters con-sidering their importance [50]. The common limitation in the prior studies is that they do not consider the detrimental impact of image compression on the IR quality, despite the fact that images in real-world applications are commonly saved in a compressed format before being enhanced by IR.
In this work, we observe that there is a large opportunity in optimizing image compression considering the end-to-end pipeline of IR tasks. Compression loss has a signifi-cant impact on the IR quality, while its impact also greatly varies according to the image content, even within the same image. Such heterogeneity offers room for IR-aware image compression that optimizes compression levels across im-age blocks within an image according to the impact on the
IR quality. IR-awareness allows us to use a lighter-weight
IR network because the quality enhancement from IR-aware image compression can compensate the quality loss due to the reduced network capacity.
Based on this observation, we present AccelIR, the first
IR-aware image compression framework that considers the end-to-end pipeline of IR tasks, including image compres-sion. AccelIR aims to reduce IR computation while main-taining the same IR quality and image size. To enable this,
AccelIR develops a practical IR-aware compression algo-rithm and adopts a lightweight IR network. AccelIR oper-ates in two phases: offline profiling and online compression.
In the offline phase, AccelIR clusters image blocks in the
representative datasets [1, 21] into groups. For each group, it constructs profiles that describe the impact of compres-sion level on the resulting IR quality and image size. In ad-dition to the profiles, a lightweight CNN is trained to guide the best-fit group for unseen image blocks. In the online phase, AccelIR retrieves the profiles for each block within an image by running the CNN. Our framework then refers to the block-level profiles to select the optimal compression level for each block, maximizing the IR quality at the same image size. Finally, the lightweight IR network is applied.
We evaluate AccelIR using a full system implementation using JPEG [53] and WebP [68], the most widely used im-age compression standards. As shown in Table 1, our evalu-ation using five different super-resolution [2, 16, 36, 37, 56], two de-noising [71, 73], and two de-blurring networks [12, 72] shows that AccelIR consistently delivers a significant benefit in a wide range of settings. Compared to applying
IR to images encoded by the standard JPEG and WebP, Ac-celIR reduces the computing cost of super-resolution, de-noising, and de-blurring by 35-74%, 24-34%, and 24-34%, respectively, under the same IR quality and image size. In addition, AccelIR can support any type of image codec and is well-fit to serve new IR tasks and networks that are not shown in the training phase. Thus, AccelIR can be easily integrated with the existing IR applications. 2.