Abstract
Recovering lighting in a scene from a single image is a fundamental problem in computer vision. While a mir-ror ball light probe can capture omnidirectional lighting, light probes are generally unavailable in everyday images.
In this work, we study recovering lighting from accidental light probes (ALPs)—common, shiny objects like Coke cans, which often accidentally appear in daily scenes. We propose a physically-based approach to model ALPs and estimate lighting from their appearances in single images. The main idea is to model the appearance of ALPs by photogram-metrically principled shading and to invert this process via differentiable rendering to recover incidental illumination.
We demonstrate that we can put an ALP into a scene to allow high-fidelity lighting estimation. Our model can also recover lighting for existing images that happen to contain an ALP*.
I’d rather be Shiny. — Tamatoa from Moana, 2016 1.

Introduction
Traditionally, scene lighting has been captured through the use of light probes, typically a chromium mirror ball; their shape (perfect sphere) and material (perfect mirror) allow for a perfect measurement of all light that intersects the probe. Unfortunately, perfect light probes rarely appear in everyday photos, and it is unusual for people to carry them around to place in scenes. Fortunately, many everyday objects share the desired properties of light probes: Coke cans, rings, and thermos bottles are shiny (high reflectance) and curved (have a variety of surface normals). These ob-jects can reveal a significant amount of information about the scene lighting, and can be seen as imperfect “accidental” light probes (e.g., the Diet Pepsi in Figure 1). Unlike perfect light probes, they can easily be found in casual photos or acquired and placed in a scene. In this paper, we explore us-ing such everyday, shiny, curved objects as Accidental Light
Probes (ALPs) to estimate lighting from a single image.
*Project website: https://kovenyu.com/ALP
Figure 1. (Left) From an image that has an accidental light probe (a Diet Pepsi can), we insert a virtual object (a Diet Coke can) with estimated lighting using the accidental light probe (Middle), and using estimated lighting from a recent state-of-the-art lighting estimation method [49] (Right). Note how our method better re-lights the inserted can to produce an appearance consistent with the environment (e.g., the highlight reflection and overall intensity).
In general, recovering scene illumination from a single view is fundamental for many computer vision applications such as virtual object insertion [9], relighting [46], and pho-torealistic data augmentation [51]. Yet, it remains an open problem primarily due to its highly ill-posed nature. Images are formed through a complex interaction between geometry, material, and lighting [21], and without precise prior knowl-edge of a scene’s geometry or materials, lighting estimation is extremely under-constrained. For example, scenes that consist primarily of matte materials reveal little information about lighting, since diffuse surfaces behave like low-pass filters on lighting during the shading process [38], eliminat-ing high-frequency lighting information. To compensate for the missing information, the computer vision community has explored using deep learning to extract data-driven priors for lighting estimation [14, 44]. However, these methods gener-ally do not leverage physical measurements to address these ambiguities, yet physical measurements can offer substantial benefits in such an ill-posed setting.
For images with ALPs, we propose a physically-based
modeling approach for lighting estimation. The main idea is to model the ALP appearance using physically-based shad-ing and to invert this process to estimate lighting. This inversion process involves taking an input image, estimating the ALP’s 6D pose and scale, and then using the object’s surface geometry and material to infer lighting. Compared to purely data-driven learning approaches that rely on diverse, high-quality lighting datasets, which are hard to acquire, our physically-based approach generalizes to different indoor and outdoor scenes.
To evaluate this technique, we collect a test set of real images, where we put ALPs in daily scenes and show that our approach can estimate high-fidelity lighting. We also demonstrate lighting estimation and object insertion based on existing images (Figure 1).
In summary, we make the following three contributions:
• We propose the concept of accidental light probes (ALPs), which can provide strong lighting cues in ev-eryday scenes and casual photos.
• We develop a physically-based approach for lighting estimation for images with an ALP and show improved visual performance compared to existing light estima-tion techniques.
• We collect a dataset of ALPs and a dataset of images with ALPs and light probes in both indoor and out-door scenes. We demonstrate that our physically-based model outperforms existing methods on these datasets. 2.