Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) obtain tremendous suc-cess in modeling relational data. Still, they are prone to adversarial attacks, which are massive threats to applying
GNNs to risk-sensitive domains. Existing defensive meth-ods neither guarantee performance facing new data/tasks or adversarial attacks nor provide insights to understand
GNN robustness from an architectural perspective. Neural
Architecture Search (NAS) has the potential to solve this problem by automating GNN architecture designs. Never-theless, current graph NAS approaches lack robust design and are vulnerable to adversarial attacks. To tackle these challenges, we propose a novel Robust Neural Architecture search framework for GNNs (G-RNA). Specifically, we de-sign a robust search space for the message-passing mech-anism by adding graph structure mask operations into the search space, which comprises various defensive operation candidates and allows us to search for defensive GNNs. Fur-thermore, we define a robustness metric to guide the search procedure, which helps to filter robust architectures. In this way, G-RNA helps understand GNN robustness from an ar-chitectural perspective and effectively searches for optimal adversarial robust GNNs. Extensive experimental results on benchmark datasets show that G-RNA significantly outper-forms manually designed robust GNNs and vanilla graph
NAS baselines by 12.1% to 23.4% under adversarial attacks. 1.

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks are well-known for modeling relational data and are applied to various downstream real-world applications like recommender systems [37], knowl-edge graph completion [25], traffic forecasting [6], drug production [45], etc. Meanwhile, like many other deep neu-ral networks, GNNs are notorious for their vulnerability under adversarial attacks [33], especially in risk-sensitive domains, such as finance and healthcare. Since GNNs model
*Equal contribution.
†Corresponding authors. node representations by aggregating the neighborhood in-formation, an attacker could perform attacks by perturbing node features and manipulating relations among nodes [55].
For example, in the user-user interaction graph, a fraudster may deliberately interact with other important/fake users to mislead the recommender system or fool credit scoring models [36].
A series of defense methods on graph data have been developed to reduce the harm of adversarial attacks.
Preprocessing-based approaches like GCN-SVD [8] and
GCN-Jaccard [38] conduct structure cleaning before training
GNNs, while attention-based models like RGCN [51] and
GNN-Guard [46] learn to focus less on potential perturbed edges. However, these methods rely on prior knowledge of the attacker. For example, GCN-SVD leverages the high-rank tendency of graph structure after Nettack [53], and
GCN-Jaccard depends on the homophily assumption on the graph structure. As a result, current approaches may fail to adapt to scenarios when encountering new data and tasks or when new attack methods are proposed. Additionally, previous methods largely neglect the role of GNN architec-tures in defending against adversarial attacks, lacking an architectural perspective in understanding GNN robustness.
In order to reduce human efforts in neural architecture designs, Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has become in-creasingly popular in both the research field and industry.
Though NAS has the potential of automating robust GNN designs, existing graph NAS methods [1, 10, 24, 49, 50] are inevitably susceptible to adversarial attacks since they do not consider adversarial settings and lack robustness de-signs [48]. Therefore, how to adopt graph NAS to search for optimal robust GNNs in various environments, and in the meantime, fill the gap of understanding GNN robustness from an architectural perspective, remains a huge challenge.
To address the aforementioned problems and to under-stand GNN robustness from an architectural perspective, we propose a novel Robust Neural Architecture search frame-work for Graph neural networks (G-RNA), which is the first attempt to exploit powerful graph neural architecture search in robust GNNs, to our best knowledge. Specifically, we first design a novel, expressive, and robust search space with
Figure 1. The overall framework of G-RNA. Given a clean graph, the supernet built upon our robust search space is trained in a single-path one-shot way. Then, the attack proxy produces several adversarial samples based on the clean graph and we search for robust GNNs with the proposed robustness metric. Finally, we evaluate the optimal robust GNN on graphs perturbed by the attacker. graph structure mask operations. The green part in Fig. 1 shows the fine-grained search space. The graph structure mask operations cover important robust essences of graph structure and could recover various existing defense meth-ods as well. We train the supernet built upon our designed search space in a single-path one-shot way [14]. Second, we propose a robustness metric that could properly measure the architecture’s robustness. Based on the clean graph, an at-tack proxy produces several adversarial samples. We search robust GNNs using our robustness metric with clean and generated adversarial samples. A simple illustration of the robustness metric is shown in the yellow part in Fig. 1. Af-ter searching for the optimal robust GNN architecture with the evolutionary algorithm, we retrain the top-selected ro-bust architectures from scratch and perform evaluations. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We develop a robust neural architecture search framework for GNNs, which considers robust designs in graph neural architecture search for the first time to the best of our knowledge. Based on this framework, we can understand adversarial robustness for GNNs from an architectural perspective.
• We propose a novel robust search space by designing de-fensive operation candidates to automatically select the most appropriate defensive strategies when confronting perturbed graphs. Besides, we design a robustness met-ric and adopt an evolutionary algorithm together with a single-path one-shot graph NAS framework to search for the optimal robust architectures.
• Extensive experimental results demonstrate the efficacy of our proposed method. G-RNA outperforms state-of-the-art robust GNNs by 12.1% to 23.4% on benchmark datasets under heavy poisoning attacks. 2.