Abstract 1.

Introduction
This work introduces alternating latent topologies (ALTO) for high-fidelity reconstruction of implicit 3D sur-faces from noisy point clouds. Previous work identifies that the spatial arrangement of latent encodings is important to recover detail. One school of thought is to encode a la-tent vector for each point (point latents). Another school of thought is to project point latents into a grid (grid la-tents) which could be a voxel grid or triplane grid. Each school of thought has tradeoffs. Grid latents are coarse and lose high-frequency detail.
In contrast, point latents preserve detail. However, point latents are more difficult to decode into a surface, and quality and runtime suffer.
In this paper, we propose ALTO to sequentially alternate between geometric representations, before converging to an easy-to-decode latent. We find that this preserves spa-tial expressiveness and makes decoding lightweight. We validate ALTO on implicit 3D recovery and observe not only a performance improvement over the state-of-the-art, but a runtime improvement of 3-10×. Project website at https:// visual.ee.ucla.edu/ alto.htm/ .
*Equal contribution.
Reconstructing surfaces from noisy point clouds is an active problem in 3D computer vision. Today, conditional neural fields offer a promising way to learn surfaces from noisy point clouds. Alternatives like voxel regression or mesh estimation are limited by cubic complexity and the requirement of a mesh template, respectively. Recent work has successfully used conditional neural fields to recon-struct 3D surfaces as an occupancy function. A conditional neural field takes as input a query coordinate and conditions this on a latent representation, e.g., feature grids. The spa-tial expressiveness of the latent representation impacts the overall surface reconstruction quality.
To achieve spatial expression, a neural field is condi-tioned on a latent space of features (latents) from the con-ditional input. In 3D surface reconstruction the input point cloud is transformed into latents arranged in some topolog-ical structure. Point latents occur when each point in the input point cloud is assigned a latent vector [4]. Triplane latents are formed when point latents are projected into a 3-axis grid [41, 52]. The triplane latent is not as spatially expressive as freeform points, but the lower spatial com-plexity makes it easier to decode. Voxel latents are another type of grid latent where latents are arranged in a feature
Figure 2. An overview of our method. Given input surface points, we obtain an implicit occupancy field with iterative alternation between features in the forms of points and 2D or 3D grids (Sec. 3.2). Then we decode the occupancy values for query points with a learned attention-based interpolation from neighboring grids (Sec. 3.3). volume [52, 66]. 2.