Abstract
The causality relation modeling remains a challenging task for group activity recognition. The causality relations describe the influence on the centric actor (effect actor) from its correlative actors (cause actors). Most existing graph models focus on learning the actor relation with syn-chronous temporal features, which is insufficient to deal with the causality relation with asynchronous temporal fea-tures. In this paper, we propose an Actor-Centric Causal-ity Graph Model, which learns the asynchronous temporal causality relation with three modules, i.e., an asynchronous temporal causality relation detection module, a causality feature fusion module, and a causality relation graph infer-ence module. First, given a centric actor and its correlative actor, we analyze their influences to detect causality rela-tion. We estimate the self influence of the centric actor with self regression. We estimate the correlative influence from the correlative actor to the centric actor with correlative regression, which uses asynchronous features at different timestamps. Second, we synchronize the two action features by estimating the temporal delay between the cause action and the effect action. The synchronized features are used to enhance the feature of the effect action with a channel-wise fusion. Third, we describe the nodes (actors) with causal-ity features and learn the edges by fusing the causality re-lation with the appearance relation and distance relation.
The causality relation graph inference provides crucial fea-tures of effect action, which are complementary to the base model using synchronous relation inference. Experiments show that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on the Volleyball dataset and Collective Activity dataset. 1.

Introduction
Group activity recognition is a challenging task to iden-tify the group activity by analyzing the actors that perform
*Corresponding author.
Figure 1. Illustration of the causality relation. (a) Asynchronous causality relation. (b) Synchronous temporal relation graph. (c)
Asynchronous temporal causality relation detection and fusion. (d) Asynchronous temporal causality relation graph learns the in-fluences of two actors to detect causality relation. In this work, we enforce the graph model with asynchronous causality relation by analyzing the actors’ influences. different actions. It has been widely used in many appli-cations in video surveillance, social interaction analysis, and sports analysis [4, 14, 25, 40]. Unlike individual action recognition, group activity recognition learns the relation between actors to infer the group activity. The relation be-tween two actors can be explained as cause-effect relation (denoted as causality relation), in which the action of one
actor (denoted as the cause actor) impacts the action of an-other actor (denoted as the effect actor). The two actors im-pact each other individually resulting in different causality relations. As the effect action performs after the cause ac-tion with a temporal delay, the asynchronous temporal fea-tures of the two actors hinder causality relation learning.
Existing methods describe the relation with the appearance feature [15] and the position feature [24, 36]. The above methods merely learn the spatial relation in each frame, which neglect to describe the relation with the temporal dynamics in the frame sequence. Some methods describe the relation with the temporal feature learned by RNN [28] and Transformer network [18]. The existing methods al-ways learn the relation at the same timestamp with the syn-chronous temporal feature, and neglect to describe the in-fluences of two actors, who have asynchronous temporal relation. Therefore, it is still challenging to capture the rela-tion with asynchronous temporal features for group activity recognition.
As the causality relation is asynchronous, we decompose our graph model with asynchronous causality relation into two sub-tasks illustrated in Figure 1b: (1) the causality rela-tion detection task by analyzing the influences of two actors with their asynchronous features, and (2) the asynchronous causality feature fusion task by integrating the feature of the effect actor with the synchronized feature of the cause actor.
Figure 1 shows the group activity prediction influenced by different actors. (1) In Figure 1a, with a temporal delay after the cause action performs (digging), the cause actor changes to the action ”falling”, and the effect actor changes to the action ”jumping”. Actors change their states with a temporal delay in an asynchronous way, which hinders cause-effect (causality) relation learning. (2) As shown in
Figure 1b, the traditional method addresses the group ac-tivity using a synchronous temporal relation graph, which contains a large number of irrelevant relations. The syn-chronous graph is hard to detect the cause-effect relation with the synchronous features at a single timestamp. With-out learning the asynchronous causality relation, the model can not explain why the effect actor jumps. For example, it uses the falling cause actor to mispredict group activity as the ”Right pass”. (3) To detect the causality relations be-tween the centric actor and its correlative actor, we focus on learning the influences with their asynchronous features.
When the centric actor is affected by the correlative actor, the influence of two actors is larger than the influence of the centric actor itself. The influences of two actors can de-tect the causality relation from the correlative actor to the centric actor. As shown in Figure 1c, after the correlative actor moves, the centric actor jumps with the temporal de-lay of one frame (+1). Then, the causality relation is used to enhance the centric actor features by fusing two actors’ fea-tures. (4) When we learn asynchronous causality relations to form a causality relation graph, which can select the rel-evant edges and enhance node features. In Figure 1d, the causality inference process finds the relation from the mov-ing actor to the jumping actor, and helps to explain the actor jumps for setting the volleyball. The causality relation ana-lyzes the influences learned with the asynchronous tempo-ral features, which is complementary to the relation learned with synchronous temporal features. The framework by in-tegrating two relation graphs can successfully predict the group activity as the “Right set”.
In this paper, we propose an Actor-Centric Causality
Graph (ACCG) Model to detect the asynchronous causal-ity relation for group activity recognition. Figure 2 shows the overview of the proposed model. The model consists of three modules, i.e., an asynchronous temporal causality relation detection module, a causality feature fusion mod-ule, and a causality relation inference module. First, we detect the causality relation between the centric actor and its correlative actor by analyzing the self influence and the correlative influence. We learn the self influence with self regression, and learn the correlative influence with correl-ative regression. We extend the correlative regression with asynchronous features of the correlative actor, which helps to learn the asynchronous causality relation by analyzing the influences of the two actors. Second, the temporal delay of the causality relation is estimated to synchronize two ac-tion features. We integrate them with a channel-wise fusion to learn the causality feature of the effect actor. Third, we describe the actors (nodes) with asynchronous causality fea-tures, and describe the edges with the causality relation for graph inference. The causality relation inference provides the crucial features of actors, which are complementary to synchronous relation inference. We apply the base model to learn the synchronous relation inference, and add two rela-tion inferences to enhance the group relation learning.
Our contributions are summarized as follows: (1) We propose an Actor-Centric Causality Graph
Model, which detects the asynchronous causality relation by analyzing the influences of two actors at different times-tamps. We design the self regression to estimate the self influence of the centric actor. We design the corelative re-gression with the asynchronous features of two actors to es-timate their correlative influence. (2) We design a causality feature fusion to enhance the feature of the centric actor by integrating it with the syn-chronized feature of its correlative actor. The synchronized feature is generated by estimating the temporal delay be-tween the asynchronous features of two actors. (3) Our Actor-Centric Causality Graph Model learns the asynchronous relation, which is complementary to syn-chronous relation learning. Our framework integrates two relations and achieves state-of-the-art performance on the
Volleyball dataset and Collective Activity dataset.
Figure 2. The overview of the actor-centric causality graph model. The base model learns the relation with synchronous features at each timestamp. The actor-centric causality graph is proposed to analyze the influence of two actors with asynchronous features, which can learn the causality relation in the asynchronous temporal causality relation detection module. The causality feature fusion model enhances the centric action with synchronized correlative action features. The causality relation graph inference module learns the contextual feature with causality relation. The framework combines the causality relation graph and the base graph for better graph relation learning. 2.