Abstract
The target of person re-identification (ReID) and gait recognition is consistent, that is to match the target pedes-trian under surveillance cameras. For the cloth-changing problem, video-based ReID is rarely studied due to the lack of a suitable cloth-changing benchmark, and gait recognition is often researched under controlled condi-tions. To tackle this problem, we propose a Cloth-Changing benchmark for Person re-identification and Gait recogni-tion (CCPG). It is a cloth-changing dataset, and there are several highlights in CCPG, (1) it provides 200 identities and over 16K sequences are captured indoors and out-doors, (2) each identity has seven different cloth-changing statuses, which is hardly seen in previous datasets, (3)
RGB and silhouettes version data are both available for research purposes. Moreover, aiming to investigate the cloth-changing problem systematically, comprehensive ex-periments are conducted on video-based ReID and gait recognition methods.
The experimental results demon-strate the superiority of ReID and gait recognition sepa-rately in different cloth-changing conditions and suggest that gait recognition is a potential solution for addressing the cloth-changing problem. Our dataset will be available at https://github.com/BNU-IVC/CCPG. 1.

Introduction
With the rapid development of video devices, more and more surveillance systems are taken into real applications and play an essential role in protecting the security of our society. However, along with the significantly growing
*Equal contribution.
†Corresponding authors.
Figure 1. The targets of person re-identification and gait recogni-tion are consistent, to search the target person from the gallery.
The main difference is that gait recognition normally requires pedestrian segmentation. amount of data, traditional social security is facing two dilemmas: data storage and inefficient monitoring. Due to artificial intelligence progress and diverse demand in so-cial security, many security technologies have come into our sights, such as face recognition, person re-identification (ReID), and gait recognition. These technologies reduce data size vastly and improve efficiency in social security.
Video-based ReID plays a vital role in surveillance video analysis, and it intends to match the probe sequence of the specific person from gallery sequences in surveillance sys-tems by learning features of multiple frames [5, 27, 43].
Compared with image-based ReID [10,21,36], video-based
ReID provides both appearance and rich temporal informa-tion. Previous video-based ReID methods [9, 12, 19, 20, 33, 36, 38] focus on the cloth-consistent setting, where people do not change their clothes in the short term. However, in the real world, clothes-changing situations are everywhere.
Due to its practical application in social security, cloth-changing ReID has gotten more attention in these years.
Another technology is gait recognition. Gait is a unique biometric characteristic that describes the walking patterns of one person [23] and contains spatial statics and temporal dynamics in the walking process. Compared with other bio-metric features, gait is hard to disguise and can work in long distances [13], so it has a potential for social security. Popu-lar gait recognition datasets [28,37] are collected under con-trol conditions, and some real-world benchmarks [41, 44] come into our sights in these years. Many gait recogni-tion methods [4, 7, 17, 18, 24] are mainly developed based on these datasets. Several challenges are studied explicitly, such as carrying bags and cloth-changing. However, the re-search on gait recognition in real scenarios is insufficient.
So gait recognition in the wild has attracted increasing at-tention.
In real scenarios, the final targets of ReID and gait recog-nition are consistent, that is, to recognize the target person across cameras, as shown in Fig. 1. Previous works [3, 39] conduct experiments to compare the performance of video-based ReID and gait recognition on video-based ReID datasets, which are cloth-unchanged. However, dressing variation in practical applications is a significant problem, especially the finer cloth-changing problem, e.g., changing a whole fit, changing only tops, and changing only pants.
Little work specializes in these cloth-changing conditions, and no comparison experiment has been conducted between video-based ReID and gait recognition. The main reason is the lack of such a cloth-changing benchmark for com-parison of cloth-changing conditions. So it is time to build such a cloth-changing dataset for video-based ReID and gait recognition. First of all, we should take three aspects into consideration. (1) RGB data. A benchmark should pro-vide RGB data for comparison between video-based ReID and gait recognition at least, because RGB data is the basic research data for them. (2) Clothes statuses. People usu-ally change their clothes daily, and a dataset should contain (3) Collec-different clothing statuses close to daily life. tion environment. The raw data should not be collected under strict restrictions, which makes the dataset similar to real-world applications as much as possible since our final target is to satisfy social security demands in the real world.
To our best knowledge, no such public dataset could sat-isfy all the requirements mentioned above. CCVID [8] only contains the front views of the pedestrians, rather than di-verse views. GREW [44] lacks RGB data and finer clothes changing.
Therefore, in this paper, we propose a benchmark, Cloth-Changing benchmark for Person re-identification and Gait recognition (CCPG). Especially, the CCPG dataset has sev-eral important features. (1) It contains 200 subjects wearing many different clothes and over 16,000 sequences, and the
RGB data is available. (2) Subjects contain seven different clothes statuses, whose cloth-changing ways include chang-ing a whole fit, changing tops, changing pants, and carrying bags, and these abundant types of dressing are supported for cloth-changing comparison.
In addition, more accu-rate tracking results are provided and reduce the noise in the dataset, because precise human detection guarantees the following recognition mission. (3) Our raw data is collected indoors and outdoors, and many challenges are considered, including viewing angles, occlusions, illumination changes, etc., which make it more similar to the real world.
Taking advantages of our new cloth-changing bench-mark, we conduct a series of systematic experiments be-tween video-based ReID and gait recognition, aiming to compare their performance in different dressing settings.
First, leading video-based ReID methods are performed on the CCPG dataset in different cloth-changing settings, which indicates that they are sensitive to the appearance features and still have room to improve on cloth-changing problems. Second, popular gait recognition methods are implemented on the CCPG dataset and achieve higher per-formance in some cloth-changing settings.
In addition, gait recognition methods are as good as ReID in partial cloth-changing situations, e.g., only changing tops and only changing pants. Third, we compare the performance of these pedestrian retrieval methods and analyze experimental results in different cloth-changing settings. The key to ad-dressing the cloth-changing problem is to exploit the cloth-invariant features, and these experimental results demon-strate the SOTA gait recognition methods have more poten-tial for cloth-changing problems.
In summary, our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• First, we present a brand new cloth-changing bench-mark, named CCPG. Compared with others, our benchmark provides finer cloth-changing conditions.
We hope it could help study the cloth-changing prob-lem for video-based ReID and gait recognition. Impor-tantly, it should be emphasized that our data collection obtains permission from authorities and adult volun-teers for research purposes.
• Second, with the motivation to study the performance of video-based ReID and gait recognition methods un-der different cloth-changing conditions, comprehen-sive experiments are conducted on them, and the re-sults show the better performance of gait recognition on CCPG, and suggest that gait recognition is a poten-tial solution for solving cloth-changing problems. 2.