Abstract
The subtle vibrations on an object’s surface contain in-formation about the object’s physical properties and its in-teraction with the environment. Prior works imaged sur-face vibration to recover the object’s material properties via modal analysis, which discards the transient vibra-tions propagating immediately after the object is disturbed.
Conversely, prior works that captured transient vibrations focused on recovering localized signals (e.g., recording nearby sound sources), neglecting the spatiotemporal re-lationship between vibrations at different object points. In this paper, we extract information from the transient surface vibrations simultaneously measured at a sparse set of object points using the dual-shutter camera described by Sheinin et al. [37]. We model the geometry of an elastic wave gen-erated at the moment an object’s surface is disturbed (e.g., a knock or a footstep) and use the model to localize the dis-turbance source for various materials (e.g., wood, plastic, tile). We also show that transient object vibrations contain additional cues about the impact force and the impacting object’s material properties. We demonstrate our approach in applications like localizing the strikes of a ping-pong ball on a table mid-play and recovering the footsteps’ locations by imaging the floor vibrations they create. 1.

Introduction
Our environment is teeming with vibrations created by the interaction of physical objects. Some vibrations, like a knock on the door or the sound of a ball bouncing off the ground, can be perceived by humans because they are transmitted from the vibrating object’s surface via the air.
However, many vibrations that fill our world are too subtle for auditory-based remote sensing. Moreover, much like ripples in a pond, the transient spatial shapes such vibrations create on object surfaces are a visual cue that can disclose the source of the disturbance and other object properties.
Object vibrations can be divided into two main types: transient and modal. For example, consider the vibrations of a tuning fork. When struck, the impulse creates tran-sient waves propagating from the impact source until they
[37]
Figure 1. When physical objects interact, like a ping pong ball bouncing off the table, they create minute vibrations that propa-gate through the objects’ surfaces and interiors. The transient vi-brations that occur immediately on impact, exaggerated here for visualization, carry information about the impact source location.
We image the surface vibrations at a sparse set of locations using the imaging system of Sheinin et al. [37]. We model the elastic wave propagation and recover the impact source locations with-out a direct line-of-sight on the impacted surface. Visit the project page for videos of results [1]. reach and vibrate the fork’s entire body. After a short time interval, the transient vibrations die down, leaving the fork to vibrate at its resonant modal frequencies. Modal analysis, which aims to measure these resonant frequen-cies [11, 13, 42], can reveal the tuning fork’s designed tone (e.g., 440 Hz for the A tone) and can also be used to analyze the fork’s material properties [9, 14, 18].
While extremely useful, modal analysis ignores the tran-sient vibrations that occur at the moment of impact. Such transient vibrations contain valuable cues about the dis-turbance’s origin, its magnitude, and the properties of the object causing the disturbance (e.g., a falling basketball vs. a falling rock). Prior works that did sense transient vibrations primarily focused on localized low-dimensional signals such as heartbeats [42, 44, 48], music and speech
[8, 15, 37, 45, 46, 48], and musical instruments [37]. These works disregard the spatiotemporal relationship between transient vibrations at different object points.
This paper focuses on recovering the physical loca-tion of an impacting object from transient surface vibra-(a) setup (b) pre-reflections (c) post-reflections
Figure 2. Elastic wave propagation in isotropic objects. (a) An electronic knocker creates repeated short knocks on a whiteboard.
For each knock, a laser Doppler vibrometer (LDV) sensor is used to optically measure the temporal vertical displacement at a single point. Aggregating and synchronizing measurements from multi-ple board points generates a video showing the surface displace-ment with time. (b) Displacement 1ms after impact. Observe the circular shape of the outgoing wave. (c) Displacement 3.1ms after impact. Here, the outgoing wave has reflected from the board’s boundaries. tions measured simultaneously at multiple surface points using the dual-shutter camera of Sheinin et al. [37]. This task opens the door to potential applications like localizing sound sources in walls (e.g., pipe bursting), localizing bullet or bird impacts on airplanes mid-flight, or impacts on ship hulls from dockside, tugs, or other debris, localizing shell-ground impacts on battlefields, localizing people in building fires or hostage situations by observing external vibrations on ceilings or side walls, and more.
While, in general, object shape and material determine its vibration profile, we show that immediately after impact, there exists a short time interval (∼1.5 ms long) where the surface vibrations can be modeled as an outwardly propa-gating elastic wave. We derive an approximate model of the wave’s geometry for both isotropic and anisotropic materi-als and develop a backprojection-based algorithm to local-ize the impact sources using the vibrations within this time interval. Unlike prior works that merely visualize acoustic wave propagation [36], we explicitly model its transient be-havior and show that only a sparse set of points is required to determine the wave’s source.
We verified our approach on various materials, including wood, plastic, glass, porcelain, and gypsum. In our exper-iments, we localized impact sources with an average error between 1.1 cm and 2.9 cm for 40 cm × 40 cm and 90 cm
× 90 cm surfaces, respectively. We also show applications like localizing ping-pong ball strikes on the table mid-play and localizing footsteps through floor vibrations beyond a camera’s line of sight.
Beyond impact localization, we show that the transient surface vibrations can convey more information about the impacting object and the impacted surface. For surfaces of unknown material, we estimate the material anisotropy by measuring vibrations at known surface points and fit-ting a material-specific wave propagation model parameter.
Our preliminary experiments suggest that the transient vi-brations’ amplitudes relate to the force applied to disturb the object [20, 28, 31], and that the vibrations’ frequency content depends on the stiffness and shape on the impacting object. We thus believe our work can inspire a new class of transient vibration imaging approaches that opens the door for novel vision tasks. 2.