Abstract
Point cloud sampling is a less explored research topic for this data representation. The most commonly used sam-pling methods are still classical random sampling and far-thest point sampling. With the development of neural net-works, various methods have been proposed to sample point clouds in a task-based learning manner. However, these methods are mostly generative-based, rather than selecting points directly using mathematical statistics.
Inspired by the Canny edge detection algorithm for images and with the help of the attention mechanism, this paper proposes a non-generative Attention-based Point cloud Edge Sampling method (APES), which captures salient points in the point cloud outline. Both qualitative and quantitative experimen-tal results show the superior performance of our sampling method on common benchmark tasks. 1.

Introduction
Point clouds are a widely used data representation in var-ious domains including autonomous driving, augmented re-ality, and robotics. Due to the typically large amount of data, the sampling of a representative subset of points is a fundamental and important task in 3D computer vision.
Apart from random sampling (RS), other classical point sampling methods including grid sampling, uniform sam-pling, and geometric sampling have been well-established.
Grid sampling samples points with regular grids and thus cannot control the number of sampled points exactly. Uni-form sampling takes the points in the point cloud evenly and is more popular due to its robustness. Farthest point sampling (FPS) [9, 29] is the most famous of them and has been widely used in many current methods when downsam-pling operations are required [19, 34, 47, 52, 56]. Geomet-ric sampling samples points based on local geometry, such as the curvature of the underlying shape. Another example of Inverse Density Importance Sampling (IDIS) [11] sam-ples points whose distance sum values with neighbors are smaller. But this method requires the point cloud to have a high density throughout, and it performs even worse when the raw point cloud has an uneven distribution.
Figure 1. Similar to the Canny edge detection algorithm that de-tects edge pixels in images, our proposed APES algorithm samples edge points which indicate the outline of the input point clouds.
The blue grids/spheres represent the local patches for given center pixels/points.
In addition to the above mathematical statistics-based methods, with the development of deep learning techniques, several neural network-based methods have been proposed for task-oriented sampling, including S-Net [8], SampleNet
[16], DA-Net [21], etc. They use simple multi-layer per-ceptrons (MLPs) to generate new point cloud sets of desired sizes as resampled results, supplemented by different post-processing operations. MOPS-Net [36] learns a sampling transformation matrix first, and then generates the sampled point cloud by multiplying it with the original point cloud.
However, all these methods are generative-based, rather than selecting points directly. On the other hand, there is an increasing body of work designing neural network-based lo-cal feature aggregation operators for point clouds. Although some of them (e.g., PointCNN [19], PointASNL [52], GSS
[53]) decrease the point number while learning latent fea-tures, they can hardly be considered as sampling methods in the true sense as no real spatial points exist during the processing. Moreover, none of the above methods consider shape outlines as special features.
In this paper, we propose a point cloud edge sampling method that combines neural network-based learning and mathematical statistics-based direct point selecting. One key to the success of 2D image processing with neural net-works is that they can detect primary edges and use them to form shape contours implicitly in the latent space [55].
Inspired by that insight, we pursue the idea of focusing on salient outline points (edge points) for the sampling of point cloud subsets for downstream tasks. Broadly speak-ing, edge detection may be considered a special sampling strategy. Hence, by revisiting the Canny edge detection al-gorithm [4] which is a widely-recognized classical edge de-tection method for images, we propose our attention-based point cloud edge sampling (APES) method for point clouds.
It uses the attention mechanism [42] to compute correla-tion maps and sample edge points whose properties are re-flected in these correlation maps. We propose two kinds of APES with two different attention modes. Based on neighbor-to-point (N2P) attention which computes correla-tion maps between each point and its neighbors, local-based
APES is proposed. Based on point-to-point (P2P) atten-tion which computes a correlation map between all points, global-based APES is proposed. Our proposed method se-lects sampled points directly, and the intermediate result preserves the point index meaning so they can be visualized easily. Moreover, our method can downsample the input point cloud to any desired size.
We summarize our contributions as follows:
• A point cloud edge sampling method termed APES that combines neural network-based learning and mathemat-ical statistics-based direct point selecting.
• Two variants of local-based APES and global-based
APES, by using two different attention modes.
• Good qualitative and quantitative results on common point cloud benchmarks, demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed sampling method. 2.