Abstract
Face forgery detection becomes increasingly crucial due to the serious security issues caused by face manipula-tion techniques. Recent studies in deepfake detection have yielded promising results when the training and testing face forgeries are from the same domain. However, the problem remains challenging when one tries to generalize the de-tector to forgeries created by unseen methods during train-ing. Observing that face manipulation may alter the re-lation between different facial action units (AU), we pro-pose the Action-Units Relation Learning framework to im-prove the generality of forgery detection. In specific, it con-sists of the Action Units Relation Transformer (ART) and the Tampered AU Prediction (TAP). The ART constructs the relation between different AUs with AU-agnostic Branch and AU-specific Branch, which complement each other and work together to exploit forgery clues.
In the Tampered
AU Prediction, we tamper AU-related regions at the image level and develop challenging pseudo samples at the feature level. The model is then trained to predict the tampered
AU regions with the generated location-specific supervi-sion. Experimental results demonstrate that our method can achieve state-of-the-art performance in both the in-dataset and cross-dataset evaluations. 1.

Introduction
The success of the generative model, e.g., Generative
Adversarial Networks (GAN) [21], rapidly improves the quality of face forgery, which provokes researchers to pur-sue antithetical counter-detection methods to deal with po-tential social security issues. Though recent works have demonstrated their effectiveness in identifying forgery im-ages from known forging methods that are used in train-ing [4,10,29,39,43], the generalization on unknown forgery
*Equal contribution
†Corresponding Author
Figure 1. The average correlation intensity (y-axis) between an
AU (x-axis) and other AUs under different data volume (top-20% and bottom-80% samples from FF++ [42], respectively).
More details and results can be found in the supplementary. It can be observed that the average correlation intensity between an AU and other AUs is weakening after manipulation. methods is not guaranteed [9, 17, 27, 52].
Some recent works [6, 31, 45, 49, 50, 55] have noticed this imminent problem and attempted to capture more in-trinsic forgery clues to improve the generalization of identi-fication methods. In particular, these works can be roughly categorized into two branches, 1) data modification which applies carefully selected augmentations [50] or manually generates forgery images [31, 45, 55] with only real im-ages to enlarge training data diversity meanwhile avoiding overfitting to specific defects, 2) auxiliary task integrat-ing which defines an affinitive loss to help the model learn underlying differences between real and fake faces [6, 55].
Despite their success, it is noticed that the relations between face units that are general in biology research for under-standing human facial characteristics are less explored, in-hibiting the further improvement of model generalization.
In this work, we aim to construct a face forgery detection framework that unifies the data modification and auxiliary task integrating schemes with relation clues of facial action units. Our insight is motivated by the theory in the Facial
Action Coding System [18], which represents human faces through a set of facial muscle movements called facial Ac-tion Units (AU). More specifically, in facial morphology, a muscle controls different AUs. When showing a certain emotion, a group of AUs would be activated simultaneously, indicating that there are underlying relations between AUs.
Therefore, a direct intuition is that relations among AUs may be different in real and manipulated faces, since de facto methods modify the entire face using graphical meth-ods, or generate the individual facial regions by GAN. This hypothesis is evidenced by our experiments in Fig. 1, which shows that an AU in real face presents stronger average cor-relation intensity to other AUs (the stars), whereas that in forgery face are weaker (the triangles).
To explore these clues, we focus on relations between local regions associated with AUs and propose the Action
Units Relation Learning framework to improve the robust-ness and generalization of the forgery detector. The pro-posed framework is comprised of AU Relation Transformer (ART) and Tampered AU Prediction (TAP). ART, explic-itly learning the relations between AUs, works as a dual network. In specific, it consists of an AU-specific Branch for learning relations among AU-aligned regions and an
AU-agnostic Branch for learning relations among image-patch regions. The AU-specific Branch extracts embed-dings aligned with individual AU and builds their relations by attention mechanism. The AU-agnostic Branch is a stan-dard Vision-Transformer block [16] that is designed to con-struct relations between different image patches. These two branches complement each other for building a detailed and global view of the input face image. From another perspec-tive, TAP formulates an auxiliary task to enhance the ability of the model to sense local forgery defects. In particular, it constructs a Partial Face Mask by randomly removing
AU-related regions from the facial area. The mask is uti-lized to modify data in the remaining regions at both image and feature levels to generate challenging fake counterparts.
The model is then trained to predict the manipulated regions with the help of Local Tampering Supervision. By doing so, the networks are more sensitive to AU-related regions that have been manipulated, which is beneficial for identifying forgery images. Notably, the proposed Action Units Re-lation Learning framework absorbs the advantages of both data modification and auxiliary task integrating schemes.
We evaluate our framework following cross-dataset pro-tocol and cross-manipulation protocol. In the cross-dataset evaluation, our approach performs favorably against other state-of-the-art detectors and achieves the AUC scores of 92.77%, 99.22%, 73.82%, 86.16%, 81.45% on CDF [36],
DFD [1], DFDC [13], DFDCP [14], and FFIW [57]
In the cross-manipulation evalua-datasets, respectively. tion, our approach achieves the AUC of 99.98%, 99.60%, 99.89%, and 98.38% on DF [2], F2F [48], FS [3] and
NT [47], respectively. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness and generalization of our framework.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose the Action Units Relation Trans-former (ART) to effectively build correlations among different AU-related regions and eventually improve the performance of the forgery detection.
• We propose the Tampered AU Prediction (TAP) as an auxiliary task to strengthen the model capability of sensing local forgery regions.
• Experimental results on in-dataset and cross-dataset evaluation protocols demonstrate the effectiveness and generalization of our framework. 2.