Abstract 1.

Introduction
Wires and powerlines are common visual distractions that often undermine the aesthetics of photographs. The manual process of precisely segmenting and removing them is extremely tedious and may take up hours, especially on high-resolution photos where wires may span the en-In this paper, we present an automatic wire tire space. clean-up system that eases the process of wire segmenta-tion and removal/inpainting to within a few seconds. We observe several unique challenges: wires are thin, lengthy, and sparse. These are rare properties of subjects that com-mon segmentation tasks cannot handle, especially in high-resolution images. We thus propose a two-stage method that leverages both global and local contexts to accurately seg-ment wires in high-resolution images efficiently, and a tile-based inpainting strategy to remove the wires given our pre-dicted segmentation masks. We also introduce the first wire segmentation benchmark dataset, WireSegHR. Finally, we demonstrate quantitatively and qualitatively that our wire clean-up system enables fully automated wire removal with great generalization to various wire appearances.
Oftentimes wire-like objects such as powerlines and ca-bles can cross the full width of an image and ruin an other-wise beautiful composition. Removing these “distractors” is thus an essential step in photo retouching to improve the visual quality of a photograph. Conventionally, removing a wire-like object requires two steps: 1) segmenting out the wire-like object, and 2) removing the selected wire and in-painting with plausible contents. Both steps, if done manu-ally, are extremely tedious and error-prone, especially for high-resolution photographs that may take photographers up to hours to reach a high-quality retouching result.
In this paper, we explore a fully-automated wire seg-mentation and inpainting solution for wire-like object seg-mentation and removal with tailored model architecture and data processing. For simplicity, we use wire to refer to all wire-like objects, including powerlines, cables, support-ing/connecting wires, and objects with wire-like shapes.
Wire semantic segmentation has a seemingly similar problem setup with generic semantic segmentation tasks; they both take in a high-resolution image and generate dense predictions at a pixel level. However, wire semantic
segmentation bears a number of unique challenges. First, wires are commonly long and thin, oftentimes spanning the entire image yet having a diameter of only a handful of pix-els. A few examples are shown in Figure 2. This prevents us from getting a precise mask based on regions of inter-est. Second, the input images can have arbitrarily high res-olution up to 10k×10k pixels for photographic retouching applications. Downsampling such high-resolution images can easily cause the thin wire structures to disappear. This poses a trade-off between preserving image size for infer-ence quality and run-time efficiency. Third, while wires have regular parabolic shapes, they are often partially oc-cluded and can reappear at arbitrary image location, thus not continuous. (e.g. [20, 36]).
To account for these challenges, we propose a system for automatic wire semantic segmentation and removal. For segmentation, we design a two-stage coarse-to-fine model that leverages both pixel-level details in local patches and global semantics from the full image content, and runs ef-ficiently at inference time. For inpainting, we adopt an ef-ficient network architecture [35], which enables us to use a tile-based approach to handle arbitrary high resolution. We design a training strategy to enforce color consistency be-tween the inpainted region and the original image. We also present the first benchmark dataset, WireSegHR, for wire semantic segmentation tasks, where we collect and anno-tate high-resolution images with diverse scene contents and wire appearances. We provide analyses and baseline com-parisons to justify our design choices, which include data collection, augmentation, and our two-stage model design.
Together, these design choices help us overcome the unique challenges of accurately segmenting wires. Our contribu-tions are as follows:
• Wire segmentation model: We propose a two-stage model for wire semantic segmentation that leverages global context and local information to predict accu-rate wire masks at high resolution. We design an in-ference pipeline that can efficiently handle ultra-high resolution images.
• Wire inpainting strategy: We design a tile-based in-painting strategy and tailor the inpainting method for our wire removal task given our segmentation results.
• WireSegHR, a benchmark dataset: We collect a wire segmentation benchmark dataset that consists of high resolution images, with diversity in wire shapes and scene contents. We also release the manual an-notations that have been carefully curated to serve as ground truths. Besides, we also propose a benchmark dataset to evaluate inpainting quality. 2.