Abstract
We tackle the task of Azimuth (angular dimension) super-resolution for Frequency Modulated Continuous Wave (FMCW) multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) radar.
FMCW MIMO radar is widely used in autonomous driv-ing alongside Lidar and RGB cameras. However, com-pared to Lidar, MIMO radar is usually of low resolution due to hardware size restrictions. For example, achieving 1◦ azimuth resolution requires at least 100 receivers, but a single MIMO device usually supports at most 12 receivers.
Having limitations on the number of receivers is problem-atic since a high-resolution measurement of azimuth angle is essential for estimating the location and velocity of ob-jects. To improve the azimuth resolution of MIMO radar, we propose a light, yet efficient, Analog-to-Digital super-resolution model (ADC-SR) that predicts or hallucinates additional radar signals using signals from only a few re-ceivers. Compared with the baseline models that are ap-plied to processed radar Range-Azimuth-Doppler (RAD) maps, we show that our ADC-SR method that processes raw
ADC signals achieves comparable performance with 98% (50 times) fewer parameters. We also propose a hybrid super-resolution model (Hybrid-SR) combining our ADC-SR with a standard RAD super-resolution model, and show that performance can be improved by a large margin. Ex-periments on our Pitt-Radar dataset and the RADIal dataset validate the importance of leveraging raw radar ADC sig-nals. To assess the value of our super-resolution model for autonomous driving, we also perform object detection on the results of our super-resolution model and find that our super-resolution model improves detection performance by around 4% in mAP. The Pitt-Radar and the code will be released at the link. 1.

Introduction
We address the task of azimuth angle super-resolution for Frequency Modulated Continuous Wave (FMCW) [25]
Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) [26] radar in au-In addition to Lidar and RGB cam-tonomous driving.
Figure 1. Previous work perform super-resolution from low-resolution and high-resolution Range-Azimuth maps after apply-ing Discrete Time Fourier Transform (FFT). Instead, we aim to predict more ADC uncaptured signals before they are transformed into Range-Azimuth (RA) maps. eras, Radar has been commonly used for autonomous ve-hicles [4, 5] due to its robustness in adverse weather condi-tions (e.g., fog, snow, rain) with longer wavelength. FMCW
MIMO radar uses a line array of receiver antennas to cap-ture reflected signals of multiple chirps sent out by a line array of transmitters. We can characterize the location (orientation and distance) and velocity of nearby objects from a radar’s Range-Azimuth-Doppler (RAD) map. The
RAD map is computed using the Discrete Time Fast Fourier
Transform (FFT) [11, 26] on the discretized receiver sig-nals after Analog-to-Digital conversion (ADC). In the do-main of autonomous driving, MIMO [26] radar devices typ-ically have low resolution due to the physical constraint on the size of the sensors. For example, a device with eight antenna receivers has at most an angle resolution of about 15◦ [11]. Thus, it is important to develop new technologies which can increase the azimuth resolution of radar sensing,
without requiring a large sensor size.
For MIMO radar [26], both range resolution and velocity (Doppler) resolution can be improved by setting different bandwidths (the range of frequencies used for signal pulses) and frame times (duration of a single signal pulse). How-ever, azimuth resolution is strictly dependent on the radar sensor’s hardware specifications, such as antenna size, and cannot be improved by changing the parameters of the radar sensor [15, 34], which restricts radar imaging performance.
To improve the azimuth resolution of radar Range-Azimuth (RA) maps, some work proposes to use regularization ap-proaches from signal processing [31, 32, 35] and deep mod-els [2, 10] for azimuth super-resolution. However, such prior work is limited to processing the RA maps (not even using Doppler information) as shown in Figure 1. Since
RAD and RA maps are the transformed data after keep-ing the magnitude only after FFTs, the information loss re-garding the relationship between each receiver may lead to limited performance for azimuth super-resolution. In addi-tion, how to enhance the azimuth resolution from process-ing ADC signals also remains challenging.
In order to tackle the challenge of azimuth angle super-resolution on the ADC signals, we propose a light, yet efficient, ADC super-resolution (ADC-SR) model for az-imuth resolution. Since the azimuth resolution is related to the number of receivers each capturing independent sig-nals, we aim to predict uncaptured signals from halluci-nated receivers. For example, the model takes ADC signals recorded with 4 receivers and outputs the predicted ADC signals with 8 receivers, as shown in Figure 1. To the best of our knowledge, our ADC-SR is the first to apply deep models to ADC signals for azimuth super-resolution. In ad-dition, the hallucinated ADC signals can then be processed with FFTs [26] to obtain high-resolution RAD maps for fur-ther use in autonomous driving such as object detection.
We note that we can further refine the RAD maps with the
RAD super-resolution (RAD-SR) model. To evaluate and compare our approach with other baseline models, we have collected a dataset named Pitt-Radar which contains ADC signals. Compared with RAD-SR which relies on RAD data, our ADC-SR achieves comparable performance with fewer network parameters. We also show that our hybrid pipeline named Hybrid-SR combining ADC-SR and RAD-SR improves the baseline model by a large margin. More-over, since naive bilinear downsampling of the RAD map does not truly reflect the outputs of lower-resolution radar sensors, we propose a more theoretically grounded way of downsampling for training later.
To assess the value of our super-resolution model for autonomous driving, we also evaluate the performance of existing object detectors trained along with our super-resolution models. The improvements in the experiments demonstrate our approach is applicable to downstream tasks in autonomous driving. The contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:
• We propose an azimuth super-resolution model named
ADC-SR which takes into complex ADC radar signals and predicts the signals from unseen receivers, which is able to produce higher-resolution RAD maps.
• We propose a hybrid model named Hybrid-SR for im-proved performance on RAD-SR when combined with our ADC-SR. To make comparisons with all of the baseline models, a downsampling method is also pro-posed for evaluation.
• We propose a MIMO radar dataset named Pitt-Radar which contains ADC signals for benchmarking.
• Our developed model not only achieves satisfactory azimuth super-resolution on our collected Pitt-Radar and one benchmark dataset but also improves the ex-isting object detector by a large margin. 2.