Abstract
A novel 4K video frame interpolator based on bilateral transformer (BiFormer) is proposed in this paper, which performs three steps: global motion estimation, local mo-in global tion reﬁnement, and frame synthesis. First, motion estimation, we predict symmetric bilateral motion
ﬁelds at a coarse scale. To this end, we propose Bi-Former, the ﬁrst transformer-based bilateral motion esti-mator.
Second, we reﬁne the global motion ﬁelds efﬁ-ciently using blockwise bilateral cost volumes (BBCVs).
Third, we warp the input frames using the reﬁned motion
ﬁelds and blend them to synthesize an intermediate frame.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed Bi-Former algorithm achieves excellent interpolation perfor-mance on 4K datasets. The source codes are available at https://github.com/JunHeum/BiFormer. 1.

Introduction
Video frame interpolation (VFI) is a low-level vision task to increase the frame rate of a video, in which two (or more) successive input frames are used to interpolate intermedi-ate frames. Its applications include video enhancement [3],
*Corresponding author. video compression [4, 5], slow-motion generation [6], and view synthesis [7, 8]. Attempts have been made to develop effective VFI methods [1, 2, 6, 9–27]. Especially, with the advances in optical ﬂow estimation [28–37], motion-based
VFI methods provide remarkable performances. But, VFI for high-resolution videos, e.g. 4K videos, remains chal-lenging due to diverse factors, such as large motions and small objects, hindering accurate optical ﬂow estimation.
Most of these VFI methods are optimized for the
Vimeo90K dataset [3] of a low spatial resolution (448 × 256), so they tend to yield poor results on 4K videos [2].
It is important to develop effective VFI techniques for 4K videos, which are widely used nowadays. 4K videos are, however, difﬁcult to interpolate, for they contain large mo-tions as in Figure 1. To cope with large motions, many opti-cal ﬂow estimators adopt coarse-to-ﬁne strategies [31–33].
At a coarse scale, large motions can be handled more efﬁ-ciently. But, motion errors at the coarse scale may propa-gate to a ﬁner scale, making ﬁne-scale results unreliable.
To reduce such errors, the transformer can be a power-ful solution, as demonstrated by recent optical ﬂow esti-mators [36, 37]. However, these estimators cannot be di-rectly used for VFI, in which the motion ﬁelds from an in-termediate frame It, 0 < t < 1, to input frames I0 and
I1 should be estimated. For such bilateral motion estima-tion [1, 2, 24, 38, 39], a novel technique is required to adopt the transformer because the source frame It is not available.
In this paper, we propose a novel 4K VFI algorithm using the bilateral transformer (BiFormer) based on bilateral cross attention. First, we estimate global motion ﬁelds at a coarse scale via BiFormer. Second, we reﬁne these global motion
ﬁelds into ﬁnal motion ﬁelds at a ﬁne scale, by employing a motion upsampler recurrently. Last, we warp the two in-put frames using the ﬁnal motion ﬁelds, respectively, and blend the two warped frames to synthesize an intermediate frame. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
BiFormer algorithm provides the best performance on 4K benchmark datasets.
The work has the following major contributions:
• We propose the ﬁrst transformer-based bilateral mo-tion estimator, called BiFormer, for VFI.
• We develop blockwise bilateral cost volumes (BBCVs) to reﬁne motion ﬁelds at 4K resolution efﬁciently.
• The proposed BiFormer algorithm outperforms the state-of-the-art VFI methods [1, 2, 14, 22–24, 40] on three 4K benchmark datasets [2, 41, 42]. 2.