Abstract
Existing AU detection algorithms are mainly based on appearance information extracted from 2D images, and well-established facial biomechanics that governs 3D fa-In this paper, cial skin deformation is rarely considered. we propose a biomechanics-guided AU detection approach, where facial muscle activation forces are modelled and are employed to predict AU activation. Specifically, our model consists of two branches: 3D physics branch and 2D image branch.
In 3D physics branch, we first derive the Euler-Lagrange equation governing facial deformation.
The Euler-Lagrange equation represented as an ordinary differential equation (ODE) is embedded into a differen-tiable ODE solver. Muscle activation forces together with other physics parameters are firstly regressed, and then are utilized to simulate 3D deformation by solving the ODE.
By leveraging facial biomechanics, we obtain physically plausible facial muscle activation forces. 2D image branch compensates 3D physics branch by employing additional appearance information from 2D images. Both estimated forces and appearance features are employed for AU detec-tion. The proposed approach achieves competitive AU de-tection performance on two benchmark datasets. Further-more, by leveraging biomechanics, our approach achieves outstanding performance with reduced training data. 1.

Introduction
Action unit (AU) describes a local facial behavior, rep-resenting the movement of one facial muscle or a group of facial muscles [6]. For example, AU12 (lip corner puller) is corresponding to the muscle zygomatic major. AU15 (lip corner depressor) is corresponding to the muscle depressor anguli oris. In Figure 1, we visualize the muscles zygomatic major and depressor anguli oris. Due to the muscle activa-tion, facial changes, in terms of both appearance and skin geometry, can be observed. Action unit detection task is to automatically predict if an AU is activated or not, given a 2D image. The majority of existing AU detection methods perform AU detection based on appearance information ex-Figure 1. Visualization of depressor anguli oris (shown in (a)) and orbicularis oris (shown in (b)). Images are from https://en. wikipedia.org/wiki available under Public Domain. tracted from 2D images [4,16,26,46]. These algorithms are mainly data-driven, whose performance highly depends on the quantity and quality of AU annotations. Unfortunately,
AU annotations are hard to obtain and prone to errors. Be-sides, data-driven AU detection algorithms can’t generalize well to unseen scenarios beyond training samples.
To perform robust and generalizable AU detection un-der limited AU annotations, generic knowledge about the anatomical spatial relationships among facial muscles is considered, based on which AU relationships are de-rived [16, 17, 48, 49]. Facial biomechanics, which defines the dynamic of facial 3D deformation given muscle acti-vation forces and is represented as second-order ODEs, is rarely considered. Facial biomechanics is important since it directly connects the muscle activation to skin deforma-tion through principled physics laws, which is applicable to different subjects and independent of a specific dataset.
In this paper, we propose a biomechanics-guided AU detection approach, where facial muscle activation forces are modelled given 2D images and are employed for AU detection task. Our model consists of two branches: 3D physics branch and 2D image branch. In 3D physics branch, the Euler-Lagrange equation governing 3D deformation is firstly derived, which is represented as an ordinary differ-ential equation (ODE). Muscle activation forces together with other physics parameters are regressed and utilized for physics-based reconstruction by solving the ODE. 2D im-age branch compensates 3D branch by employing appear-ance information. Finally, the estimated muscle activation forces together with image features are employed for AU detection. Our contributions lie in three parts:
• We are the first to explicitly integrate facial biome-chanics for AU detection task. Particularly, our physics branch explicitly models muscle activation forces. Af-ter training, physically plausible and anatomically meaningful forces are employed for AU detection.
• We are the first to introduce a generalized coordinate using facial blendshape basis and derive the Euler-Lagrange equation in the defined generalized coordi-nate. The Euler-Lagrange equation is then embedded into a differentiable ODE solver for physics-based re-construction.
• We empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed approach on two benchmark datasets. Fur-thermore, our method remains robust under limited AU annotations and is cross-dataset generalizable. 2.