Abstract
Recently, whether and how cutting-edge Neuroscience findings can inspire Artificial Intelligence (AI) confuse both communities and draw much discussion. As one of the most critical fields in AI, Computer Vision (CV) also pays much attention to the discussion. To show our ideas and exper-imental evidence to the discussion, we focus on one of the most broadly researched topics both in Neuroscience and
CV fields, i.e., Face Recognition (FR). Neuroscience studies show that face attributes are essential to the human face-recognizing system. How the attributes contribute also be explained by the Neuroscience community. Even though a few CV works improved the FR performance with attribute enhancement, none of them are inspired by the human face-recognizing mechanism nor boosted performance signifi-cantly. To show our idea experimentally, we model the biological characteristics of the human face-recognizing system with classical Convolutional Neural Network Op-erators (CNN Ops) purposely. We name the proposed
Biologically-inspired Network as BioNet. Our BioNet con-sists of two cascade sub-networks, i.e., the Visual Cor-tex Network (VCN) and the Inferotemporal Cortex Net-work (ICN). The VCN is modeled with a classical CNN backbone. The proposed ICN comprises three biologically-inspired modules, i.e., the Cortex Functional Compartmen-talization, the Compartment Response Transform, and the
Response Intensity Modulation. The experiments prove that: 1) The cutting-edge findings about the human face-recognizing system can further boost the CNN-based FR network. 2) With the biological mechanism, both identity-related attributes (e.g., gender) and identity-unrelated at-tributes (e.g., expression) can benefit the deep FR models.
Surprisingly, the identity-unrelated ones contribute even more than the identity-related ones. 3) The proposed BioNet significantly boosts state-of-the-art on standard FR bench-mark datasets. For example, BioNet boosts IJB-B@1e-6 from 52.12% to 68.28% and MegaFace from 98.74% to 99.19%. The source code is released in1. 1https://github.com/pengyuLPY/BioNet.git
Figure 1. (A) Face recognition mechanism of human brains. (B)
Architecture of BioNet. 1.

Introduction
It sparked much discussion in both communities that
Zador, Bengio et al. [54] claimed fundamental Neuro-science research must be invested to accelerate AI progress.
Some researchers agree with Zador’s opinion. For example,
LeCun et al. [52] and Goodfellow et al. [10] proposed the
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) inspired by past clas-sical Neuroscience discoveries about the human visual cor-tex. However, other researchers have some concerns, e.g., 1) Except for the high-level and abstract senses from Neuro-science, can their specific studies support the AI fields? 2)
Since CNN [9,10,26,52] was proposed many years ago, few
AI works have been inspired by recent Neuroscience find-ings. It results in a lack of evidence to support that the latest
Neuroscience studies can continue to drive AI progress.
To show an idea and some experimental evidence to this discussion, we focus on one of the most broadly re-searched topics in both fields, i.e., Face Recognition (FR).
The latest Neuroscience studies [1, 2, 7, 38, 51] found that
besides the visual cortex, the inferotemporal cortex plays a vital role in the human face-recognizing system. Because of the following three biological characteristics, the infer-otemporal cortex characterizes the complicated relationship between attributes and makes attributes contribute to FR. 1) The inferotemporal cortex is functionally compartmen-talized by the face stimuli (i.e., identity, attributes) [1, 7]. 2) The responses of the functional compartments are trans-formed into the successor neurons for processing com-plex tasks [38], e.g., FR. 3) The intensities of the func-tional compartment are variant in the inferotemporal cor-tex [2], demonstrating that the attributes are not equally essential to the human face-recognizing system.
In the
AI field, some CNN-based FR works proposed effective loss functions [4, 18, 21, 33, 40, 45] and others designed task-oriented face recognition structures [22,23, 27–29,42].
Because of these excellent works, FR in AI achieved big progress. Although a few AI FR works [14, 19, 43] boosted the performance with attribute enhancement, none of them are inspired by the human face-recognizing mechanism nor boosted performance significantly. We experimentally prove that the deep FR models do not capture the biological characteristics of the human face-recognizing system intro-duced above. We suspect this is the factor limiting their performance improvement.
To address the problem and experimentally support the opinion of Zador, Bengio et al. [54], we purposely model the biological characteristics of the human face-recognizing system with classical CNN Ops. We name the proposed
Biologically-inspired Network as BioNet. The proposed
BioNet is constituted by two cascade sub-networks, i.e.,
Visual Cortex Network (VCN) and Inferotemporal Cor-tex Network (ICN), as Fig.1 shows. The VCN is modeled with a CNN backbone (e.g., CASIA-Net [53], ResNet [12]), which follows the common suggestions in [10, 52]. The proposed ICN is composed of three biologically-inspired modules, i.e. the Cortex Functional Compartmentalization (CFC), the Compartment Response Transform (CRT), and the Response Intensity Modulation (RIM). CFC is based on the attention mechanism [8, 15, 44] to functionally com-partmentalize the feature maps with face stimuli (i.e. iden-tity and attributes). CRT is implemented by Multilayer
Perception (MLP) [36] to transform intra-compartment re-sponses to successor neurons for processing complex FR task. RIM follows the ensemble mechanism [55] to fuse inter-compartment features via adaptive weights to achieve the final FR representation. The proposed modules follow the human face-recognizing mechanism and empower ICN to characterize the complicated relationship between stim-uli. All of them are indispensable in BioNet.
With such a Biologically-inspired Network, we achieve better attribute-enhanced deep FR models than ever. Fur-thermore, we conduct careful analyses of the proposed modules and the impacts of attributes. We also compare the BioNet to the attention, multi-task learning, and ensem-ble mechanisms, verifying the advantage of our proposals.
We think the experiments in this paper can support the con-clusions: 1. To the best of our knowledge, after CNN was pro-posed, our BioNet is the first network inspired by the latest Neuroscience studies. It provides experimental evidence that the latest Neuroscience studies can fur-ther boost the CNN-based FR network and continue to drive AI progress. 2. With the Neuroscience mechanism, both identity-related attributes (e.g., gender) and identity-unrelated attributes (e.g., expression) can benefit the deep FR models. Surprisingly, we find the identity-unrelated ones contribute even more than the identity-related ones. Besides, we also propose an online latent at-tributes mining method and prove that the latent at-tributes contribute to the FR task, too. 3. Without bells and whistles, Our BioNet consistently and significantly boosts state-of-the-art of FR models on standard FR benchmark datasets, e.g., IJB-A [24],
IJB-B [46], IJB-C [46], and MegaFace [20]. 2.