Abstract
Performance comparison on VOC12
The existing weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) methods pay much attention to generating accu-rate and complete class activation maps (CAMs) as pseudo-labels, while ignoring the importance of training the seg-mentation networks. In this work, we observe that there is an inconsistency between the quality of the pseudo-labels in CAMs and the performance of the ﬁnal segmentation model, and the mislabeled pixels mainly lie on the bound-ary areas.
Inspired by these ﬁndings, we argue that the focus of WSSS should be shifted to robust learning given the noisy pseudo-labels, and further propose a boundary-enhanced co-training (BECO) method for training the seg-mentation model. To be speciﬁc, we ﬁrst propose to use a co-training paradigm with two interactive networks to im-prove the learning of uncertain pixels. Then we propose a boundary-enhanced strategy to boost the prediction of dif-ﬁcult boundary areas, which utilizes reliable predictions to construct artiﬁcial boundaries. Beneﬁting from the design of co-training and boundary enhancement, our method can achieve promising segmentation performance for different
CAMs. Extensive experiments on PASCAL VOC 2012 and
MS COCO 2014 validate the superiority of our BECO over other state-of-the-art methods. 1 1.

Introduction
Acquiring precise pixel-wise annotations for semantic segmentation is quite laborious. To alleviate the high re-liance on per-pixel labeling, weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) has been proposed that only utilizes image-level class labels to perform pixel-level classiﬁca-tion. Such a task usually involves two training stages. In the ﬁrst stage, a classiﬁcation model is trained with im-age labels and then used to generate class activation maps (CAMs) [72], which as seed regions are further expanded
In the second stage, the generated to the pseudo-labels.
*Corresponding author 1The code and models are available at https://github.com/
ShenghaiRong/BECO.
U o
I m 74 72 70 68 66 64 62 60 train set: pseudo-labels quality val set: deeplabv2 performance
SEAM
IRN
EDAM
RIB
EPS
AMN
PPC
Method
Figure 1. Pseudo label quality and deeplabv2 performance of different WSSS methods, evaluated on the PASCAL VOC 2012 train set and val set, respectively. The red circles indicate that the quality of pseudo-labels and the performance of the segmentation model is inconsistent. Best viewed in color. pseudo-labels serve as pixel-wise ground truths (GTs) to train a segmentation model. Current mainstream meth-ods [6, 27, 29, 69] believe that more accurate and complete pseudo-labels tend to train a better semantic segmentation model, and thus they are mainly dedicated to improving
CAMs in the ﬁrst stage, where the mean Intersection-over-Union (mIoU) is used to evaluate the quality of generated pseudo-labels.
There is a natural question that needs to be asked, i.e.,
Can better pseudo-labels guarantee to train a better seg-mentation model? To explore the effect of the pseudo-labels on the second-stage segmentation model, we choose sev-eral representative WSSS methods and report their mIoUs of the pseudo-labels on train set and the predictions of the segmentation models on val set.
Figure 1 shows the results, where the PASCAL VOC2012 dataset [9] is used and the same segmentation network Deeplab [4] is adopted. The red circles indicate the inconsistency between the mIoU of pseudo-labels and the performance of segmen-tation models. Evidently, the pseudo-labels with a higher mIoU do not mean a better segmentation model. In fact, the WSSS approaches inevitably yield noisy pseudo-labels.
Then naively training the model would overﬁt the noisy la-bels and the generalization performance of segmentation networks would be degraded [47]. In this work, we argue that WSSS needs to pay attention to robust learning with noisy labels in the second stage other than the pseudo-label generation in the ﬁrst stage.
As a corollary, we focus on the second stage of WSSS and thus mainly consider the critical obstacle, i.e., noises of pseudo-labels. According to the statistics of real data, such noises which contain most of the noisy false-positive background and incompleteness of objects, mainly come from the semantic boundaries.
Inspired by this obser-vation, we believe that the model performance would be greatly improved if the boundary pixels can be correctly predicted. Previous works on learning from noisy labels mainly focus on the classiﬁcation task, e.g., robust architec-ture [5,12,13,59], robust regularization [58,70], loss adjust-ment [53], and sample selection [14, 18, 40, 54, 67]. How-ever, the pixel-level learning with noise in WSSS is more challenging than the robust learning in image classiﬁcation, since the key supervisory signal on the boundary area is to-tally absent and meanwhile these pixels are inherently hard to be correctly predicted due to semantic confusion caused by neighboring pixels.
To tackle this issue, we propose a co-training paradigm in this work to improve the learning of noisy pixels and a boundary-enhanced strategy to boost the prediction on the boundary, both of which form our proposed method named
BECO. Speciﬁcally, we construct two parallel deep net-works to perform semantic predictions that are designed to teach each other about all possibly noisy pixels. Here the pixel annotations with low conﬁdence are regarded as noisy labels. Through imposing the consistency of two-network predictions, it is expected that the semantic information of uncertain pixels will be rectiﬁed as much as possible. As for the boundaries, we propose to highlight their prediction by assigning a larger weight in loss. But we need to identify the boundary pixels with accurate labels, which is required by training and naturally difﬁcult for WSSS. Inspired by mixup-like techniques [32, 41], we propose to construct the boundary pixels by copying and pasting the high-conﬁdence area in one image to another image. As shown in Figure 2, the high-conﬁdence pixels tend to lie inside the objects and can be almost correctly predicted though they are incom-plete. So we can exploit their pseudo-labels as ground truth during training. As a result, we construct some artiﬁcial boundaries with accurate labels for different classes of ob-jects. Beneﬁting from co-training and boundary enhance-ment, BECO can alleviate the issue of different noises and signiﬁcantly improve the segmentation performance.
In summary, the main contributions of this work are as follows:
• We show the inconsistency between the quality of the (a)Original prediction  (b)High confidence prediction  over a threshold
Figure 2. Visualization of predicted segmentation labels. (a) origi-nal prediction by segmentation model and (b) high-conﬁdence pre-diction by ﬁltering the output with a threshold. Mislabeled pixels are concentrated on boundary areas and pixels with high conﬁ-dence tend to be correct and inside the objects. pseudo-labels in CAMs and the performance of the segmentation model, and then suggest the attention of
WSSS should be shifted from the pseudo-label gener-ation to the robust learning with noisy labels.
• We propose a co-training paradigm to improve the learning of uncertain pixels, and a boundary-enhanced strategy to boost the prediction on difﬁcult boundary areas, which utilizes reliable predictions to construct artiﬁcial boundaries.
• We validate the effectiveness of our method on the
PASCAL VOC 2012 and MS COCO 2014, which out-performs other state-of-the-art models by a consider-able margin. 2.