Abstract
Camouﬂaged object detection (COD) aims to address the tough issue of identifying camouﬂaged objects visually blended into the surrounding backgrounds. COD is a chal-lenging task due to the intrinsic similarity of camouﬂaged objects with the background, as well as their ambiguous boundaries. Existing approaches to this problem have de-veloped various techniques to mimic the human visual sys-tem. Albeit effective in many cases, these methods still struggle when camouﬂaged objects are so deceptive to the vision system. In this paper, we propose the FEature De-composition and Edge Reconstruction (FEDER) model for
COD. The FEDER model addresses the intrinsic similarity of foreground and background by decomposing the features into different frequency bands using learnable wavelets. It then focuses on the most informative bands to mine sub-tle cues that differentiate foreground and background. To achieve this, a frequency attention module and a guidance-based feature aggregation module are developed. To com-bat the ambiguous boundary problem, we propose to learn an auxiliary edge reconstruction task alongside the COD task. We design an ordinary differential equation-inspired edge reconstruction module that generates exact edges. By learning the auxiliary task in conjunction with the COD task, the FEDER model can generate precise prediction maps with accurate object boundaries. Experiments show that our FEDER model signiﬁcantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods with cheaper computational and memory costs. The code will be available at https://github. com/ChunmingHe/FEDER. 1.

Introduction
Camouﬂaged object detection (COD) aims to detect and segment objects “seamlessly” integrated into surrounding
*Corresponding author.
Figure 1. Results of SegMaR [14] and our method under the in-trinsic similarity (IS) and edge disruption (ED) challenges. Our method better localizes the objects and produces clearer edges. environments. COD is a challenging task as it needs to com-bat against excellent camouﬂage strategies, including back-ground matching [41], disruptive coloration [33], etc., and distinguish the subtle differences between candidate objects and their backgrounds. Research in COD can simultane-ously facilitate the development of visual perception for nu-ance discrimination and promote various valuable real-life applications, ranging from concealed defect detection [17] in industry to pest monitoring [35] in agriculture.
COD faces two main challenges. The ﬁrst is the intrinsic similarity (IS) challenge, which occurs when camouﬂaged objects share similar colors and patterns with their back-grounds. This makes it difﬁcult to even roughly localize those camouﬂaged objects. The second is the edge dis-ruption (ED) challenge, which arises from extremely am-biguous object boundaries. Even if a rough localization is achieved, precise segmentation can barely be obtained.
To tackle these challenges, most existing works aim to develop models that mimic the human visual system [6,28].
However, since camouﬂage strategies are designed by prey to confuse the predator’s visual system, and the intrinsic topological properties of candidate objects are not distinc-tive, such human perception-oriented attempts may struggle to identify subtle discriminative features and fail to effec-tively address the above challenges. For instance, as illus-trated in Fig. 1, the state-of-the-art human perception-based
COD method can only generate inaccurate prediction maps, such as the vague caddisﬂy and incomplete dog (Row 2 and 4), or even fail to detect camouﬂaged objects like the bird and snake (Row 1 and 3). Therefore, a better COD method should compensate for the “ﬂaw” in human perception by emphasizing subtle discriminative features.
Based on the biological study [41], camouﬂaged objects often employ various camouﬂage strategies to conceal their discriminative differences, which mainly exist in texture de-tails and global information distribution, within surround-ing environments. Such a study inspires us to cope with the COD task by decomposing the camouﬂage scenario into different parts. This allows for the disentanglement of var-ious intricate connections, enabling each part to be sepa-rately handled to fully excavate subtle discriminative cues.
With this inspiration, we propose the FEature Decom-position and Edge Reconstruction (FEDER) model for the
COD task, which compensates for the deﬁciencies of hu-man perception by emphasizing subtle discriminative fea-tures and effectively addresses the IS and ED challenges.
Speciﬁcally, to combat the intractable localization problem caused by the IS challenge, we design the deep wavelet-like decomposition (DWD) strategy, which decomposes the ex-tracted features into different frequency bands using learn-able wavelet-like modules. Then, we focus on the most informative bands by ﬁltering out noteworthy parts where discriminative cues are most likely to exist by a novel fre-quency attention (FA) module. Moreover, a guidance-based feature aggregation (GFA) module is proposed to aggregate the multi-scale decomposed features with attentional guid-ance to further emphasize discriminative information.
To address the ambiguous boundary problem of the ED challenge, we propose learning an auxiliary edge recon-struction task to encourage the network to excavate edge de-tails. We design the ordinary differential equation (ODE)-inspired edge reconstruction (OER) module to reconstruct accurate and complete edge prediction maps using a high-order ODE solver, speciﬁcally, the second-order Runge-Kutta. Incorporating this auxiliary task with the COD task can facilitate the generation of precise segmentation results with accurate object boundaries.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose the FEature Decomposition and Edge Re-construction (FEDER) model for the COD task. To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to approach
COD from a decomposition perspective.
• To highlight the subtle discriminative features, we pro-pose frequency attention modules to ﬁlter out the note-worthy parts of corresponding features and design the
Guidance-based Feature Aggregation module to aggre-gate the multi-scale features with attentional guidance.
• We propose to learn an auxiliary edge reconstruction task along with the COD task to help generate pre-cise segmentation maps with accurate object bound-aries and design the ODE-inspired edge reconstruction module for complete edge prediction.
• The proposed FEDER signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on four datasets by a large margin with cheaper computational and memory costs. 2.