Abstract
Jointly matching multiple, non-rigidly deformed 3D shapes is a challenging, N P-hard problem. A perfect matching is necessarily cycle-consistent: Following the pairwise point correspondences along several shapes must end up at the starting vertex of the original shape. Unfor-tunately, existing quantum shape-matching methods do not support multiple shapes and even less cycle consistency.
This paper addresses the open challenges and introduces the first quantum-hybrid approach for 3D shape multi-matching; in addition, it is also cycle-consistent. Its itera-tive formulation is admissible to modern adiabatic quantum hardware and scales linearly with the total number of input shapes. Both these characteristics are achieved by reduc-ing the N -shape case to a sequence of three-shape match-ings, the derivation of which is our main technical contribu-tion. Thanks to quantum annealing, high-quality solutions with low energy are retrieved for the intermediate N P-hard objectives. On benchmark datasets, the proposed ap-proach significantly outperforms extensions to multi-shape matching of a previous quantum-hybrid two-shape match-ing method and is on-par with classical multi-matching methods. Our source code is available at 4dqv.mpi-inf.mpg.de/CCuantuMM/. 1.

Introduction
Recently, there has been a growing interest in applying quantum computers in computer vision [3, 20, 32]. Such quantum computer vision methods rely on quantum anneal-ing (QA) that allows to solve N P-hard quadratic uncon-strained binary optimisation problems (QUBOs). While having to formulate a problem as a QUBO is rather inflexi-ble, QA is, in the future, widely expected to solve QUBOs at speeds not achievable with classical hardware. Thus, cast-ing a problem as a QUBO promises to outperform more un-restricted formulations in terms of tractable problem sizes and attainable accuracy through sheer speed.
A recent example for such a problem is shape match-ing, where the goal is to estimate correspondences between
Figure 1. Our quantum-hybrid method matches all 100 shapes of the FAUST collection [4] with guaranteed cycle consistency (white arrows). Here, we visualise the matchings via texture transfer between all shapes. Our method scales linearly in the number of shapes. See the full figure in the supplement. two shapes. Accurate shape matching is a core element of many computer vision and graphics applications (i.e., tex-ture transfer and statistical shape modelling). If non-rigid deformations are allowed, even pairwise matching is N P-hard, leading to a wide area of research that approximates this problem, as a recent survey shows [15]. Matching two shapes is one of the problems that was shown to benefit from quantum hardware: Q-Match [39] iteratively updates a subset of point correspondences using QA. Specifically, its cyclic α-expansion allows to parametrise changes to per-mutation matrices without relaxations.
The question we ask in this work is: How can we design a multi-shape matching algorithm in the style of Q-Match that has the same benefits? As we show in the experiments, where we introduce several na¨ıve multi-shape extensions of
Q-Match, this is a highly non-trivial task. Despite tweaking them, our proposed method significantly outperforms them.
If N >2 shapes have to be matched, the computational complexity of na¨ıve exhaustive pairwise matching increases quadratically with N , which does not scale to large N . Fur-thermore, these pairwise matchings can easily turn out to be inconsistent with each other, thereby violating cycle con-scales linearly with the number of shapes N .
• A new formulation of the optimisation objective for the three-shapes case that is mappable to modern QA.
• A new policy in shape multi-matching to address the
N -shape case relying on a three-shapes formulation and adaptive choice of an anchor shape.
Our experiments show that CCuantuMM significantly outperforms several variants of the previous quantum-hybrid method Q-Match [39]. It is even competitive with several non-learning-based classical state-of-the-art shape methods [19, 33] and can match more shapes than them. In a broader sense, this paper demonstrates the very high po-tential of applying (currently available and future) quantum hardware in computer vision. 2.