Abstract
We propose a novel knowledge distillation framework for effectively teaching a sensorimotor student agent to drive from the supervision of a privileged teacher agent. Cur-rent distillation for sensorimotor agents methods tend to re-sult in suboptimal learned driving behavior by the student, which we hypothesize is due to inherent differences between the input, modeling capacity, and optimization processes of the two agents. We develop a novel distillation scheme that can address these limitations and close the gap between the sensorimotor agent and its privileged teacher. Our key in-sight is to design a student which learns to align their input features with the teacher’s privileged Bird’s Eye View (BEV) space. The student then can benefit from direct supervision by the teacher over the internal representation learning. To scaffold the difficult sensorimotor learning task, the student model is optimized via a student-paced coaching mecha-nism with various auxiliary supervision. We further propose a high-capacity imitation learned privileged agent that sur-passes prior privileged agents in CARLA and ensures the student learns safe driving behavior. Our proposed sen-sorimotor agent results in a robust image-based behavior cloning agent in CARLA, improving over current models by over 20.6% in driving score without requiring LiDAR, historical observations, ensemble of models, on-policy data aggregation or reinforcement learning. 1.

Introduction
Learning internal representations for making intricate driving decisions from images involves a complex optimiza-tion task [4, 43, 54]. The inherent challenge for end-to-end training of driving agents lies in the immense complexity of learning to map high-dimensional visual observations into general and safe navigational decisions [13, 20, 70]. Even given millions of training examples [4], today’s agents still fail to reliably learn an internal representation that can be used for robust processing of complex visual scenarios (e.g., dense urban settings with intricate layouts and dynamic ob-stacles) in a safe and task-driven manner [13, 20, 70].
To ease the challenging sensorimotor training task, re-Figure 1. Effective Knowledge Distillation for Sensorimotor
Agents. Our proposed CaT (Coaching a Teachable student) frame-work enables highly effective knowledge transfer between a priv-ileged teacher and a sensorimotor (i.e., image-based) student. An alignment module learns to transform image-based features to the teacher’s BEV feature space, where the student can then lever-age extensive and direct supervision on its learned intermediate representations. The student model is optimized via a coaching mechanism with extensive auxiliary supervision in order to fur-ther scaffold the difficult sensorimotor learning task. cent approaches decompose the task into stages, e.g., by first training a high-capacity privileged network with com-plete knowledge of the world and distilling its knowl-edge into a less capable vision-based student network [11, 13, 23, 47, 79]. However, due to the inherent differences between the inputs and architectures of the two agents, current methods rely on limited supervisory mechanisms from the teacher, i.e., exclusively through the teacher’s output [11, 13] or knowledge distillation of a single final fully-connected layer [71, 79, 81]. Moreover, the privileged teacher’s demonstration targets may be noisy or difficult for the student to imitate, given the limited perspective [27]. In this work, we sought to develop a more effective knowledge distillation paradigm for training a sensorimotor agent to drive. Our key insight is to enable more extensive supervi-sion from the teacher by reducing the gap between internal modeling and learning capabilities between the two agents.
Our proposed approach for holistic knowledge distilla-tion is informed by human instruction, which often involves structured supervision in addition to high-level demonstra-tions, e.g., providing various hints to scaffold information in a way that the student can better understand [30]. When teaching others new and challenging skills, i.e., where a stu-dent may not be able to replicate the demonstration such as riding a bicycle or driving a vehicle, teachers may provide additional supervision regarding the underlying task struc-ture and their own internal reasoning [64]. Analogously to our settings, the privileged teaching agent can potentially provide richer supervision when teaching a limited capacity sensorimotor student, i.e., through more careful and direct guidance of the underlying representation learning.
In our work, we introduce CaT, a novel method for teach-ing a sensorimotor student to drive using supervision from a privileged teacher. Our key insights are threefold: 1) Effec-tive Teacher: We propose to incorporate explicit safety-aware cues into the BEV space that facilitate a surpris-ingly effective teacher agent design. While prior privileged agents struggle to learn to drive in complex urban driving scenes, we demonstrate our learned agent to match expert-level decision-making. 2) Teachable Student via Align-ment: An IPM-based transformer alignment module can facilitate direct distillation of most of the teacher’s features and better guide the student learning process. 3) Student-paced Coaching: A coaching mechanism for managing difficult samples can scaffold knowledge and lead to im-proved model optimization by better considering the ability of the student. By holistically tackling the complex knowl-edge distillation task with extensive teacher and auxiliary supervision, we are able to train a state-of-the-art image-based agent in CARLA [21]. Through ablation studies, in-put design, and interpretable feature analysis, we also pro-vide critical insights into current limitations in learning ro-bust and generalized representations for driving agents. 2.