Abstract
In this work, we propose the complexity-guided slimmable decoder (cgSlimDecoder) in combination with skip-adaptive entropy coding (SaEC) for efficient deep video compression. Specifically, given the target complex-ity constraints, in our cgSlimDecoder, we introduce a set of new channel width selection modules to automatically decide the optimal channel width of each slimmable con-volution layer. By optimizing the complexity-rate-distortion related objective function to directly learn the parameters of the newly introduced channel width selection modules and other modules in the decoder, our cgSlimDecoder can automatically allocate the optimal numbers of parameters for different types of modules (e.g., motion/residual decoder and the motion compensation network) and simultaneously support multiple complexity levels by using a single learnt decoder instead of multiple decoders. In addition, our pro-posed SaEC can further accelerate the entropy decoding procedure in both motion and residual decoders by simply skipping the entropy coding process for the elements in the encoded feature maps that are already well-predicted by the hyperprior network. As demonstrated in our comprehensive experiments, our newly proposed methods cgSlimDecoder and SaEC are general and can be readily incorporated into three widely used deep video codecs (i.e., DVC, FVC and
DCVC) to significantly improve their coding efficiency with negligible performance drop. 1.

Introduction
Recently, learning-based video codecs [1, 15, 22, 28] have achieved promising coding performance and outper-formed widely used commercial codecs like H.264 [46] and H.265 [40]. However, learning-based video codecs are always inefficient due to computationally complex opera-tions. In practical application scenarios, it is desirable that the video codecs can decode the videos in real-time. Addi-tionally, the decoders from different devices can afford dif-ferent computational complexities under different scenar-ios. For example, a cloud server can afford higher compu-tational resource while a smartphone can afford much less computational resource. Therefore, it is also desirable to develop a video decoder that can simultaneously support multiple computational complexities.
In order to achieve practical video codecs, two aspects should be taken into consideration during decoding. First, there are different modules in most decoders (see Figure 1 (a)) and the network structure of different modules in each decoder (e.g., motion decoder, residual decoder and motion compensation networks) needs to be carefully designed to meet different complexity constraints. However, different modules need to handle different types of information (e.g., residual information versus motion information) and thus require different channel widths under different complex-ity constraints, which makes it hard to manually design the optimal channel widths for different convolution layers in different modules. Second, the encoded bit-streams need to be entropy decoded back into the entire feature map. How-ever, most elements in the feature map are already precisely predicted by the hyperprior networks [33]. As a result, it is less efficient to entropy code the entire feature map as it will also degrade the decoding efficiency.
Considering these two aspects, in this work, we propose a complexity-guided slimmable decoder (cgSlimDecoder) in combination with skip-adaptive entropy coding (SaEC) for efficient deep video coding. Motivated by the slimmable neural networks [21,53] for various visual recognition tasks, for the decoder network, we propose a complexity-guided slimmable decoder by additionally introducing a set of new channel width selection modules to automatically decide the optimal channel width of each slimmable convolution layer under different complexity constraints. By learning the parameters from our complexity-guided channel width selection modules and other modules (e.g., the slimmable convolution layers) through optimizing the complexity-rate-distortion based objective function, our slimmable decoder can automatically select the optimal channel widths for dif-ferent modules such that the target complexity constraints can be optimally allocated to different modules (e.g., the motion/residual decoder and the motion compensation net-work). When the computational resource is sufficient (resp.,
limited), larger (resp., smaller) channel width is preferred in the decoding process to reconstruct high-quality video se-quences (resp., for more efficient decoding). In addition, we also propose the SaEC method for more efficient en-tropy coding of the encoded motion/residual feature map from the motion/residual encoder. Specifically, we take the hyperprior information as the input to predict whether each element can be precisely predicted by the hyperprior net-works. For each precisely predicted element, we directly use the mean value of its predicted distribution from the hy-perprior network, which will save bits and also accelerate the decoding process by skipping the entropy decoding pro-cess for these elements. The rest elements are still entropy coded for more accurate reconstruction.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed meth-ods, we evaluate our cgSlimDecoder in combination with
SaEC based on different baseline frameworks including
DVC [28], FVC [15] and DCVC [22]. The experimental results demonstrate that our proposed methods are general and can significantly improve the decoding efficiency with comparable rate-distortion performance.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose a complexity-guided slimmable decoder for efficient video decoding, which can simultaneously support multiple complexity levels by simply using one learned decoder instead of multiple decoders.
• Our newly proposed cgSlimDecoder method can au-tomatically allocate the optimal complexities (i.e., the optimal channel widths for different convolu-tion layers) for different types of modules (e.g., mo-tion/residual decoder) to meet the overall complexity constraints of the entire video decoder. In addition, we also propose the SaEC coding method for more effi-cient and effective entropy coding.
• Our proposed methods are general and can be incor-porated into a set of widely used video compression methods (i.e., DVC, FVC and DCVC) and improve their decoding efficiency with negligible performance drop. 2.