Abstract 1.

Introduction
We consider the problem of finding a continuous and non-rigid matching between a 2D contour and a 3D mesh.
While such problems can be solved to global optimality by finding a shortest path in the product graph between both shapes, existing solutions heavily rely on unrealistic prior assumptions to avoid degenerate solutions (e.g. knowledge to which region of the 3D shape each point of the 2D con-tour is matched). To address this, we propose a novel 2D-3D shape matching formalism based on the conjugate prod-uct graph between the 2D contour and the 3D shape. Do-ing so allows us for the first time to consider higher-order costs, i.e. defined for edge chains, as opposed to costs de-fined for single edges. This offers substantially more flexi-bility, which we utilise to incorporate a local rigidity prior.
By doing so, we effectively circumvent degenerate solutions and thereby obtain smoother and more realistic matchings, even when using only a one-dimensional feature descrip-tor. Overall, our method finds globally optimal and contin-uous 2D-3D matchings, has the same asymptotic complex-ity as previous solutions, produces state-of-the-art results for shape matching and is even capable of matching partial shapes. Our code is publicly available.1 1https://github.com/paul0noah/sm-2D3D
In recent years the computer vision community has put great effort into the matching of either two 2D or two 3D shapes. However, the task of matching a 2D shape to a 3D shape is a problem that has received less attention, even though it has a high practical relevance due to its wide va-riety of applications. For example, 2D-3D shape match-ing has the potential to bridge the gap between the 2D and 3D domain by making interaction with 3D objects more ac-cessible to non-experts, who typically find the manipula-tion of 2D shapes more intuitive than operating 3D mod-elling tools.
In addition to the modelling and manipula-tion of 3D shapes using 2D sketches (see Fig. 1), 2D-3D shape matching is relevant for 3D shape retrieval from 2D queries (e.g. searching a hand-drawn sketch in a 3D shape database), for augmented reality interactions (e.g. using hand-gestures to select 3D objects), for 3D image analysis based on 2D images (e.g. matching 2D X-ray image seg-mentations to 3D CT image segmentations), or for multi-modal 2D-3D shape analysis. 2D-3D shape matching can be framed as finding a con-tinuous mapping of a 2D contour (e.g. a sketch of an an-imal outline) to a 3D shape (e.g. a 3D model of this ani-mal), see Fig. 1 (left). Here, the matched 2D contour that is deformed to the 3D shape should resemble the original
2D shape as much as possible, i.e. spatial shape deforma-tions should be small. While humans have an intuitive and implicit understanding of good 2D-3D matchings, unfortu-nately, it is non-trivial to transfer this understanding into a rigorous mathematical framework: left-right flips are not distinguishable; the 2D shape does not contain all parts of the 3D shape (e.g. 2D shape of the wolf in Fig. 1 (left) con-tains only two legs); usually there is more than one good solution; and even slight deviations from a good matching can either be another good matching or can be a bad match-ing (e.g. zig-zagging on the 3D shape). In addition, phrasing 2D-3D shape matching as an optimisation problem requires to compute features on both shapes that allow to distinguish corresponding points from non-corresponding points – this is particularly difficult as many of the widely-used features for 2D or 3D shapes do not have a natural counterpart in the other domain, and are thus not directly comparable.
Nevertheless, previous work shows that matching a 2D contour to a 3D shape can be efficiently and optimally solved based on shortest paths in product graphs [28]. How-ever, existing solutions require strong, unnatural assump-tions (e.g. a coarse pre-matching, see Sec. 3.2) in order to resolve (some of) the above-mentioned difficulties.
In this paper we present a novel graph-based formalism that relaxes previous unnatural assumptions, which in turn al-lows to solve a substantially more difficult setting of 2D-3D shape matching. Our main contributions are:
• We present a novel matching formalism based on conju-gate product graphs that allow to encode more expressive higher-order information.
• For the first time this makes it possible to impose a local rigidity prior that penalises deformations, which in turn leads to previously unseen matching quality.
• Opposed to involved high-dimensional feature descrip-tors that were previously used (e.g. spectral features), our method requires only a simple one-dimensional feature that encodes the local object thickness – a feature that can naturally be defined for 2D and 3D shapes.
• Overall, our technical contributions allow us to solve 2D-3D matching for the first time without the requirement of a coarse pre-matching. 2.