Abstract
Stochastic filtering is widely used to deal with nonlin-ear optimization problems such as 3-D and visual track-ing in various computer vision and augmented reality ap-plications. Many current methods suffer from an imbal-ance between exploration and exploitation due to their par-ticle degeneracy and impoverishment, resulting in local op-timums. To address this imbalance, this work proposes a new constrained evolutionary diffusion filter for nonlinear optimization. Specifically, this filter develops spatial state constraints and adaptive history-recall differential evolu-tion embedded evolutionary stochastic diffusion instead of sequential resampling to resolve the degeneracy and im-poverishment problem. With application to monocular en-doscope 3-D tracking, the experimental results show that the proposed filtering significantly improves the balance be-tween exploration and exploitation and certainly works bet-ter than recent 3-D tracking methods. Particularly, the sur-gical tracking error was reduced from 4.03 mm to 2.59 mm. 1.

Introduction
Tracking a camera’s 3-D motion is vital in various com-puter vision applications, e.g., augmented reality, 3-D re-construction, computer assisted surgery, navigation and mapping, and robotics. Recent advances in 3-D tracking are widely discussed in the literature [9, 11, 13, 20, 21, 33].
Different from commonly used cameras in daily life, en-doscopic cameras are typical hand-held devices (called en-doscopes) used to inspect interior surfaces or inaccessible regions of tubular or hollow structures where the human visual system can hardly observe. While industrial endo-scopes are powerful for examining unreachable areas of
*The author would like to give his special thanks to Professor Raymond
Honfu Chan who is with Hong Kong Centre for Cerebro-cardiovascular
Health Engineering and City University of Hong Kong. This work was supported in part by the National Nature Science Foundation of China un-der Grants 82272133 and 61971367, in part by the Fujian Provincial Tech-nology Innovation Joint Funds under Grant 2019Y9091, and in part by the
Fujian Provincial Natural Science Foundation under Grant 2020J01004. buildings or parts of machines, surgical endoscopes are use-ful to intuitively inspect cavities in the body. Monocular endoscopic 3-D tracking plays an essential role in precise industrial inspection, clinical diagnosis and treatment.
Unfortunately, surgical endoscopic cameras only provide 2-D video images without any depth information and cannot localize themselves and targets of interest like tumors in the surgical field. To this end, surgical 3-D tracking methods are widely developed to accurately localize surgical tools and targets and reduce inadvertent hurts in endoscopic or robotic surgery [16, 19, 26]. Such 3-D tracking is a nonlin-ear optimization problem as well as a multisensor or mul-tisource information fusion procedure, which is commonly solved by stochastic optimization methods [4].
Stochastic filtering is widely used for 3-D tracking [23], and usually generates a population of particles (initial solu-tions) and propagates them to approximate the optimal solu-tion. But it still limits itself to local optimums or premature convergence due to an imbalance between exploration and exploitation. Specifically, this imbalance results from the particle degeneracy and impoverishment after sequential re-sampling, leading to ineffective filtering. Theoretically, this work aims to solve the particle degeneracy-impoverishment problem to balance exploring and exploiting and create a new effective and powerful filtering strategy with robust op-timization performance. Technically, this work also strives for addressing several challenges in current surgical 3-D tracking methods: (1) endoscopic image uncertainty or arti-facts in vision-based 3-D tracking, (2) inaccurate and jitter measurements in sensor-based 3-D tracking, and (3) tissue deformation and patient movement in surgical procedures.
Technical contributions of this work are clarified as fol-lows. First of all, two new spatial state constraints are in-troduced for nonlinear optimization problems, improving the optimization performance. More interestingly, a new strategy of evolutionary stochastic diffusion with adaptive history-recall differential evolution instead of sequential re-sampling can successfully resolve the particle degeneracy-impoverishment problem, effectively balancing between ex-ploration and exploitation. We then propose constrained
evolutionary diffusion filtering (CEDF), which is a meta-heuristic optimization algorithm and more ambidextrous than other filters. Additionally, a new hybrid bronchoscope 3-D tracking framework using the proposed filtering is de-veloped to fuse multisource data including computed to-mography (CT) or magnetic resonance (MR) images, surgi-cal videos, and positional sensor measurements. Our frame-work can tackle these challenges discussed above. 2.