Abstract
Face image quality assessment (FIQA) estimates the util-ity of the captured image in achieving reliable and accurate recognition performance. This work proposes a novel FIQA method, CR-FIQA, that estimates the face image quality of a sample by learning to predict its relative classifiability.
This classifiability is measured based on the allocation of the training sample feature representation in angular space with respect to its class center and the nearest negative class center. We experimentally illustrate the correlation between the face image quality and the sample relative classifiability.
As such property is only observable for the training dataset, we propose to learn this property by probing internal net-work observations during the training process and utilizing it to predict the quality of unseen samples. Through exten-sive evaluation experiments on eight benchmarks and four face recognition models, we demonstrate the superiority of our proposed CR-FIQA over state-of-the-art (SOTA) FIQA algorithms. 1 1.

Introduction
Face image utility indicates the utility (value) of an im-age to face recognition (FR) algorithms [1, 19]. This util-ity is measured with a scalar, namely the face image qual-ity (FIQ) score, following the definition in ISO/IEC 2382-37 [20] and the FR Vendor Test (FRVT) for FIQA [10].
As FIQA measures the face utility to FR algorithm, it does not necessary reflects, and does not aim at measuring, the perceived image quality, e.g. a profile face image can be of high perceived quality but of low utility to FR algo-rithm [35]. Assessing this perceived image quality has been addressed in the literature by general image quality assess-ment (IQA) methods [26, 29, 30] and is different than as-sessing the utility of an the image for FR . This is reflected by FIQA methods [28, 32, 36] significantly outperforming
IQA methods [26, 29, 30] in measuring the utility [19] of face images in FR, as demonstrated in [8, 28, 36]. 1https://github.com/fdbtrs/CR-FIQA
SOTA FIQA methods focused either on creating con-cepts to label the training data with FIQ scores and then learn a regression problem [14, 15, 32], or on developing a link between face embedding properties under certain scenarios and the FIQ [28, 34, 36]. Generally, the sec-ond approach led to better FIQA performances with most works mentioning the error-prone labeling of the ground truth quality in the first research direction as a possible rea-son [28, 36]. However, in the second category, transferring the information in network embeddings into an FIQ score is not a learnable process, but rather a form of statistical analysis, which might not be optimal.
This paper proposes a novel learning paradigm to assess
FIQ, namely the CR-FIQA. Our concept is based on learn-ing to predict the classifiability of FR training samples by probing internal network observations that point to the rel-ative proximity of these samples to their class centers and negative class centers. This regression is learned simulta-neously with a conventional FR training process that min-imizes the distance between the training samples and their class centers. Linking the properties that cause high/low classifiability of a training sample to the properties leading to high/low FIQ, we can use our CR-FIQA to predict the
FIQ of any given sample. We empirically prove the theo-rized link between classifiability (Section 3.3) and FIQ and conduct thorough ablation studies on key aspects of our CR-FIQA design (Section 5). The proposed CR-FIQA is eval-uated on eight benchmarks along with SOTA FIQAs. The reported results on four FR models demonstrate the supe-riority of our proposed CR-FIQA over SOTA methods and the stability of its performance across different FR models.
An overview of the proposed CR-FIQA is presented in Fig-ure 1 and will be clarified in detail in this paper. 2.