Abstract
We present a neural technique for learning to select a local sub-region around a point which can be used for mesh parameterization. The motivation for our framework is driven by interactive workflows used for decaling, tex-turing, or painting on surfaces. Our key idea is to incor-porate segmentation probabilities as weights of a classi-cal parameterization method, implemented as a novel dif-ferentiable parameterization layer within a neural network framework. We train a segmentation network to select 3D regions that are parameterized into 2D and penalized by the resulting distortion, giving rise to segmentations which are distortion-aware. Following training, a user can use our system to interactively select a point on the mesh and ob-tain a large, meaningful region around the selection which induces a low-distortion parameterization. Our code1 and project2 are publicly available. 1.

Introduction
Many interactive workflows for decaling, texturing, or painting on a 3D mesh require extracting a large surface patch around a point that can be mapped to the 2D plane with low distortion. Unlike global parameterization ap-proaches that map the entire mesh to 2D while introducing as few cuts as possible [1, 7–9, 17, 35, 38, 41, 43, 44, 53, 54, 56]), this work focuses on segmenting a local sub-region around a point of interest on a mesh for parameterization
[25,36,45,46,60,69,70,73]. Local parameterizations are ad-vantageous in certain modeling settings because they are in-1https://github.com/threedle/DA-Wand 2https://threedle.github.io/DA-Wand/ herently user-interactive, can achieve lower distortion than their global counterparts, and are computationally more ef-ficient. To date, however, techniques for extracting a sur-face patch that is amenable to local parameterization have largely relied on heuristics balancing various compactness, patch size, and developability priors [18].
This work instead takes a data-driven approach to learn distortion-aware local segmentations that are optimal for local parameterization. Our proposed framework uses a novel differentiable parameterization layer to predict a patch around a point and its corresponding UV map.
This enables self-supervised training, in which our network is encouraged to predict area-maximizing and distortion-minimizing patches through a series of carefully con-structed priors, allowing us to sidestep the scarcity of parameterization-labeled datasets.
We name our system the Distortion-Aware Wand (DA
Wand), which given an input mesh and initial triangle se-lection, outputs soft segmentation probabilities. We incor-porate these probabilities into our parameterization layer by devising a weighted version of a classical parameterization method - LSCM [35] - which we call wLSCM. This adap-tation gives rise to a probability-guided parameterization, over which a distortion energy can be computed to enable self-supervised training. We prove a theorem stating that the wLSCM UV map converges to the LSCM UV map as the soft probabilities converge to a binary segmentation mask, which establishes the direct relation between probabilities and binary segmentation in the parameterization context.
Reducing the distortion of the UV map and maximiz-ing the segmentation area are competing objectives, as UV distortion scales monotonically with patch size. Naively summing these objectives leads to poor optimization with
undesirable local minima. We harmonize these objectives by devising a novel thresholded-distortion loss, which pe-nalizes triangles with distortion above some user-prescribed threshold. We additionally encourage compactness through a smoothness loss inspired by the graphcuts algorithm [26].
We design a novel near-developable segmentation dataset to initialize the weights of our segmentation net-work, with an automatic generation algorithm which can be run out of the box. We then train this network end-to-end on a dataset of unlabelled natural shapes using our parame-terization layer with distortion and compactness priors.
We leverage a MeshCNN [15] backbone to learn directly on the input triangulation which enables sensitivity to sharp features and a large receptive field which enables patch growth. Moreover, by utilizing intrinsic mesh features as in-put, our system remains invariant to rigid-transformations.
DA Wand allows a user to interactively select a triangle on the mesh and obtain a large, meaningful region around the selection which can be UV parameterized with low dis-tortion. We show that the neural network is able to leverage global information to extend the segmentation with mini-mal distortion gain, in contrast to existing heuristic meth-ods which stop at the boundaries of high curvature re-gions. Our method can produce user-conditioned segmenta-tions at interactive rates, beating out alternative techniques.
We demonstrate a compelling interactive application of DA
Wand in Fig. 1, in which different regions on the sorting hat mesh are iteratively selected and decaled. We show addi-tional example textures in the supplemental. 2.