Abstract
Naked eye recognition of age is usually based on com-parison with the age of others. However, this idea is ignored by computer tasks because it is difficult to obtain represen-tative contrast images of each age. Inspired by the transfer learning, we designed the Delta Age AdaIN (DAA) opera-tion to obtain the feature difference with each age, which obtains the style map of each age through the learned val-ues representing the mean and standard deviation. We let the input of transfer learning as the binary code of age natural number to obtain continuous age feature informa-tion. The learned two groups of values in Binary code mapping are corresponding to the mean and standard de-viation of the comparison ages. In summary, our method consists of four parts: FaceEncoder, DAA operation, Bi-nary code mapping, and AgeDecoder modules. After get-ting the delta age via AgeDecoder, we take the average value of all comparison ages and delta ages as the predicted age. Compared with state-of-the-art methods, our method achieves better performance with fewer parameters on mul-tiple facial age datasets. Code is available at https:
//github.com/redcping/Delta_Age_AdaIN 1.

Introduction
Facial age estimation has been an active research topic in the computer version, for its important role in human-computer interaction [9,40], facial attribute analysis [2,29], market analysis [2], and so on. After the rise of deep learn-ing, many deep structures, such as VGG [41], ResNet [18],
MobileNet [38], have been used as feature learning methods to solve the problem of facial age estimation [7, 45, 46].
In general, the methods for facial age estimation can be grouped into three categories: regression methods, classi-fication methods, and ranking methods [27, 33]. The age
*Corresponding author. †These authors contributed equally to this work. regression methods consider labels as continuous numeri-cal values [15, 30]. Except for the universal regression, re-searchers also proposed hierarchical models [17] and the soft-margin mixture of regression [21] to handle the hetero-geneous data. Facial age classification approaches usually regard different ages or age groups as independent category labels [16], which can be divided into single-label learning and label distribution learning methods [7]. The single la-bel learning [16,37] treats each age independently, ignoring the fact that facial images of similar ages are very similar.
Label distribution learning methods [12, 13, 20, 39] learn a label distribution that represents the relative importance of each label when describing an instance. This method is to compare the distance or similarity between the distribu-tion predicted by the model and the actual distribution [7].
Nevertheless, acquiring distributional labels for thousands of face images is a non-trivial task. The ranking approaches treat the age value as rank-ordered data and use multiple binary classifiers to determine the rank of the age [3–5].
Although the above methods study the problem of fa-cial age estimation from different emphases, they all be-long to the perspective of computer vision, which can be summarized as feature extraction and modeling to predict age. This is different from the mechanism of the naked hu-man eye recognizing age, which is obtained by comparing the current experience information with most humans. Be-cause it is difficult to get representative age images of dif-ferent races, computer tasks often ignore the idea of com-parative learning. The style image can also be a contrast in style transfer learning. [23, 24].
Inspired by this, we propose a Delta Age Adaptive Instance Normalization op-eration (DAA) to obtain representative results of each age through transfer learning. We want to transfer the current image into a style map of each comparative age. And then learn the feature difference between the current age and all the comparative ages. Finally, the predicted age is obtained based on the comparative age difference. Style images’ mean and standard deviation are the keys to style transfer, and the random value cannot reflect the process of aging.
Figure 1. The overall structure of our network. The Network contains two inputs: the facial age image and the 8-bit binary code of ages.
The MLP is a perception with three FC layers. FaceEncoder is a feature extraction block. Continuous feature differences between each age from 0 to 99 and the age of the input image are obtained by DAA transfers with the Binary code mapping module. And in the AgeDecoder module, more robust age estimation is done by the feature differences and their corresponding age label of binary codes.
We convert all ages into unique 8-bit binary codes and then learn comparative ages’ mean and standard deviation vec-tors through the fully connected layer. The experiment re-sults on four challenging age datasets demonstrate that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We designed the Delta Age AdaIN (DAA) operation based on the idea of human eye contrast learning.
• To ensure that the delta age after transfer reflects con-tinuity, we convert the natural number of ages into bi-nary code. Finally, 100 delta ages feature maps will be generated for each content feature map.
• We designed a network based on age transfer learn-ing to realize robust age estimation, achieving excel-lent performance on four datasets. 2.