Abstract
A vast amount of images and pixel-wise annotations al-lowed our community to build scalable segmentation solu-tions for natural domains. However, the transfer to expert-driven domains like microscopy applications or medical healthcare remains difficult as domain experts are a critical factor due to their limited availability for providing pixel-wise annotations. To enable affordable segmentation so-lutions for such domains, we need training strategies which can simultaneously handle diverse annotation types and are not bound to costly pixel-wise annotations. In this work, we analyze existing training algorithms towards their flexibility for different annotation types and scalability to small anno-tation regimes. We conduct an extensive evaluation in the challenging domain of organelle segmentation and find that existing semi- and semi-weakly supervised training algo-rithms are not able to fully exploit diverse annotation types.
Driven by our findings, we introduce Decoupled Semantic
Prototypes (DSP) as a training method for semantic seg-mentation which enables learning from annotation types as diverse as image-level-, point-, bounding box-, and pixel-wise annotations and which leads to remarkable accuracy gains over existing solutions for semi-weakly segmentation. 1.

Introduction
Modern semantic segmentation pipelines like [11,24,64] enable a wide range of segmentation applications in do-mains like urban scenes [13, 41] or natural images [19, 37, 73]. Besides recent progress in supervised training and network architectures, an (even more?) important reason for this success was the availability of large budgets for the creation of training datasets. A significant portion of these budgets is usually spent on human labor for creat-ing pixel-wise annotation masks. Motivated by cost re-duction, crowd-sourced annotation with briefly instructed
Figure 1. The availability of domain experts for annotating data is often the major bottleneck in expert-driven domains. Can we give experts the freedom to provide diverse annotation types based on their available time, and still train models successfully? annotators became a popular choice, e.g., for the creation of MSCoco [37] or OpenImages [7]. However, this is of-ten not possible for application domains where extensively trained experts need to provide annotations. As an example,
Guay et al. highlighted in [23] that “Cell biologists have used [...] segmentations of cellular structures to provide rich [...] new insights into cellular processes”, but annota-tion “required nine months’ work from two in-lab annota-tors and represented a small fraction of all imaged cells.”.
For such expert-driven domains (Fig. 1), the time of skilled annotators needs to be used more efficiently, as their number can not be easily scaled up. Hence, training al-gorithms should not rely on naively extending collections of pixel-wise masks.
Instead, training algorithms should be flexible towards the annotation-granularity which an ex-pert has time to and is willing to provide (expert-centrism) and should still efficiently exploit small quantities of pixel-wise annotations (annotation efficiency). Thereby, experts become the center of the segmentation pipeline, and can leverage their time and knowledge flexibly, e.g. in form of bounding box-, image-level- or single point annotations.
In this work, we evaluate both properties for existing training algorithms. As a starting point, we follow com-mon semi-supervised scenarios and analyze annotation effi-ciency where we systematically reduce available pixel-wise annotations. In addition, we analyze existing training algo-rithms towards their expert-centrism by varying the num-ber of pixel-wise masks and the annotation types. Based on these findings, we finally present Decoupled Semantic
Prototypes: an expert-centric training algorithm applicable to any off-the-shelf segmentation architecture, designed by adapting ideas from contrastive learning to semi-weakly su-pervised scenarios and combining it with end-to-end train-able protype-based segmentation networks. Our experi-ments give insight into which algorithms can be flexibly used in expert-driven domains, and also give intuitions on how to spend annotation budgets: always on pixel-wise masks or on coarser annotations?
In summary, our contributions are as follows: (1) We carefully benchmark segmentation training algo-rithms by investigating how well they scale to fewer and fewer pixel-wise annotations and how well they handle diverse weak label types, giving strong base-lines and insights into their applicability for expert-driven domains. (2) We introduce the Annotation Compression Ratio (ACR) as a metric for analyzing semi-weakly super-vised algorithms towards their annotation efficiency and expert-centrism w.r.t. full supervision signals. (3) We propose Decoupled Semantic Prototypes as a sim-ple but efficient method for expert-centric semi-weakly segmentation which can learn from a diverse mix of annotation-types and which leads to gains of up to
+12.8% absolute DICE for organelle segmentation. 2.