Abstract
Encouraged by the effectiveness of encoding temporal dynamics within the frequency domain, recent human mo-tion prediction systems prefer to first convert the motion representation from the original pose space into the fre-quency space. In this paper, we introduce two closer looks at effective frequency representation learning for robust mo-tion prediction and summarize them as: decompose more and aggregate better. Motivated by these two insights, we develop two powerful units that factorize the frequency representation learning task with a novel decomposition-aggregation two-stage strategy: (1) frequency decompo-sition unit unweaves multi-view frequency representations from an input body motion by embedding its frequency fea-tures into multiple spaces; (2) feature aggregation unit de-ploys a series of intra-space and inter-space feature aggre-gation layers to collect comprehensive frequency represen-tations from these spaces for robust human motion predic-tion. As evaluated on large-scale datasets, we develop a strong baseline model for the human motion prediction task that outperforms state-of-the-art methods by large margins: 8%∼12% on Human3.6M, 3%∼7% on CMU MoCap, and 7%∼10% on 3DPW. 1.

Introduction 3D skeleton-based human motion prediction system forecasts future poses given a past motion.
It helps ma-chines understand human behavior and plan their own re-sponses, which is crucial in many real-world applications, including intelligent surveillance [11, 40], human-machine interaction [16, 17] and autonomous driving [18, 32]. The core challenge behind this task lies in developing a powerful mapping function that effectively bridges past body motion to the future [23, 25, 27, 30, 33].
*Corresponding author.
Figure 1. Diverse frequency distributions of body poses. As for a human action, the differences in temporal smoothness between different body joints and motion samples enlarge the representa-tion gap in its frequency space.
Earlier prediction algorithms tend to extract motion pat-terns from the original pose space [7, 9, 10, 22, 34, 43].
Due to the subject-specific nature of pose space, their em-bedding representations intertwine body motion informa-tion and structure information jointly. In this case, they en-capsulate an inductive bias on general human stature and thus suffer from limited robustness against body shape per-turbation. Inspired by the effectiveness of encoding tem-poral smoothness in frequency domain, frequency space encourages human motion prediction systems to focus on trajectory-related cues [1, 42]. As an initial attempt, Mao et al. [28] propose to convert the motion representation from the pose space into the frequency space with discrete cosine transform (DCT). Following this insight, recent methods widely use DCT as a routine operation in the data prepro-cessing stage and extract feature embeddings from the sin-gle frequency space initialized by the DCT [21, 24, 26, 38].
In this context, the frequency features extracted from past body motions dominate the future motion prediction. A further investigation into developing a powerful frequency representation learning framework for robust human motion prediction remains fundamental yet under-explored.
As sketched in Figure 1, diverse frequency distributions of body motions lie in intra-sample and inter-sample lev-els: (1) intra-sample difference. Since the human skeleton
Figure 2. Network Architecture. we factorize the frequency representation learning into two-stage decomposition-aggregation scheme:
Frequency Decomposition Unit (FDU) extracts multi-view frequency features from an input body motion by embedding its frequency representations into K spaces; Feature Aggregation Unit (FAU) deploys L intra-space and inter-space feature aggregation layers to collect comprehensive frequency representations for robust human motion prediction. is a non-rigid articulated structure, different body joints ex-hibit different frequency appearances in their motion trajec-tories; (2) inter-sample difference. Different personal mo-tion styles in the same activity brings subtle intra-class bias to different data samples, enlarging the frequency represen-tation gap between human motion samples. These diverse frequency distributions make human motion prediction sys-tems prone to be incapable of governing the input body tra-jectories with unseen frequency variations. It prompts us to develop multi-view augmentation learning into a promising solution for robust human motion prediction. Instead of ex-tracting features from a single frequency space initialized by the DCT, we first introduce an input body motion into multiple frequency spaces to enrich its spectral encoding.
Then, we collect richer multi-view frequency representa-tions from these spaces for robust human motion prediction.
Specifically, as illustrated in Figure 2, we factorize the frequency representation learning into two sequen-tial stages: (1) Frequency Decomposition Unit (FDU) un-weaves finer frequency representations from an input body motion by tuning each body joint trajectory with multiple versatile filters. By embedding the frequency representa-tion into multiple feature spaces, FDU explores multi-view frequency representations on input body poses; (2) Feature
Aggregation Unit (FAU) first deploys a series of adaptive graph filters within each frequency space and then inter-leaves feature-crossing layers to promote message exchange between spaces. These intra-space and inter-space informa-tion aggregations benefit FAU in extracting comprehensive body features for robust body motion prediction. Integrat-ing both FDU and FAU components, we reformulate the frequency representation learning into a novel and powerful decomposition-aggregation scheme.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized into the following:
• We propose a frequency decomposition unit (FDU) that develops multiple versatile filters to embed each body joint trajectory into multiple frequency spaces.
By exploring multi-view frequency representations on an input body motion, FDU enriches its encodings in the spectral domain.
• Pairing with FDU, we design a feature aggregation unit (FAU) that deploys a series of intra-space and inter-space feature aggregation layers to extract comprehen-sive representations from multiple frequency spaces.
By promoting message propagation within and be-tween different spaces, FAU collects richer multi-view body features for robust motion prediction.
• Integrating FDU with FAU, we develop a power-ful motion prediction system that factorizes the fre-quency representation learning into a decomposition-aggregation scheme. As verified on three datasets, it significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods in short-term and long-term motion predictions. 2.