Abstract
We study the problem of outlier correspondence pruning for non-rigid point cloud registration. In rigid registration, spatial consistency has been a commonly used criterion to discriminate outliers from inliers. It measures the compat-ibility of two correspondences by the discrepancy between the respective distances in two point clouds. However, spa-tial consistency no longer holds in non-rigid cases and out-lier rejection for non-rigid registration has not been well studied. In this work, we propose Graph-based Spatial Con-sistency Network (GraphSCNet) to filter outliers for non-rigid registration. Our method is based on the fact that non-rigid deformations are usually locally rigid, or local shape preserving. We first design a local spatial consistency mea-sure over the deformation graph of the point cloud, which evaluates the spatial compatibility only between the corre-spondences in the vicinity of a graph node. An attention-based non-rigid correspondence embedding module is then devised to learn a robust representation of non-rigid cor-respondences from local spatial consistency. Despite its simplicity, GraphSCNet effectively improves the quality of the putative correspondences and attains state-of-the-art performance on three challenging benchmarks. Our code and models are available at https://github.com/ qinzheng93/GraphSCNet. 1.

Introduction
Non-rigid point cloud registration is a fundamental and critical problem in computer graphics, computer vision, and robotics. It aims at recovering the non-rigid warping func-tion that transforms a source point cloud to a target one. In practice, the two point clouds are usually incomplete and share partial and even low overlap, which considerably in-creases the difficulty of registration.
Estimating the warping function relies on extracting ac-curate correspondences. Benefiting from the recent ad-vances in deep point representation [46,53,56,57], learning-based matching methods [13, 17, 20, 24, 31, 45, 47, 55, 58]
*Corresponding author: kevin.kai.xu@gmail.com.
Figure 1. GraphSCNet Overview. Given a set of putative corre-spondences for non-rigid registration, GraphSCNet can accurately prune the outliers among them while preserve the inliers, which contributes to significantly better registration results. have obtained significantly high quality of putative cor-respondences. However, similar success has yet to be achieved in deformable cases. Under significant deforma-tion, these methods are inevitably prone to outliers, which can drastically degrade the accuracy of registration.
Outlier rejection is a common technique for robust point cloud registration. However, most existing methods focus on rigid registration. An effective method of outlier prun-ing for non-rigid registration has so far been missing. On the one hand, a rigid transformation can be pinned down by a small set of inlier correspondences (e.g., a rotation can be determined by 3 non-colinear inliers) such that sampling consensus methods (e.g., RANSAC [19]) can effectively re-move the outliers and recover the alignment transformation in a hypothesize-and-verify manner. However, non-rigid registration requires dense and thoroughly-distributed cor-respondences to precisely describe the deformation, thus preventing the application of sampling consensus methods.
On the other hand, rigid transformations preserve Euclidean distance between every pair of points. This spatial consis-tency provides a strong necessary condition for finding in-lier correspondences and has been extensively adopted in rigid registration [3, 11, 27, 28]. Apparently, such spatial consistency does not hold for non-rigid cases. These dif-ficulties make outlier rejection for non-rigid registration a challenging problem.
We propose an outlier rejection network named Graph-based Spatial Consistency Network (GraphSCNet) tailored for non-rigid registration. Our method is designed around i.e., non-the local rigidity of non-rigid deformations, rigid deformations are locally isometric such that the local shape of the point cloud is approximately preserved. We first design a graph-based local spatial consistency mea-sure on the deformation graph [51] built over the source point cloud.
It measures the geometric compatibility be-tween the correspondences in the vicinity of a given graph node. Based on this measure, we propose an attention-based graph-based correspondence embedding module to extract spatial-consistency-aware features for correspon-dences, which are further used for discriminative classifi-cation of inlier and outlier. Thanks to the powerful local spatial consistency, our method can effectively prune out-liers in putative correspondences while keeping as many in-liers as possible. To our knowledge, our method is the first learning-based outlier rejection for non-rigid point cloud registration. Extensive experiments on three challenging benchmarks demonstrate clear superiority of our method. In particular, GraphSCNet outperforms the recent state-of-the-art NDP [32] by over 10% on AccS and AccR for both high-and low-overlap scenarios on the 4DMatch benchmark [31].
Our main contributions include:
• An outlier rejection network for non-rigid point cloud registration which is, the first learning-based approach to outlier correspondence pruning for non-rigid scenarios. to our knowledge,
• A graph-based local spatial consistency which mea-sures the local geometric compatibility between cor-respondences within a local region.
• An attention-based correspondence embedding mod-ule which encodes the local spatial consistency for learning robust correspondence representation. 2.