Abstract
Let us rethink the real-world scenarios that require hu-man motion prediction techniques, such as human-robot collaboration. Current works simplify the task of predicting human motions into a one-off process of forecasting a short future sequence (usually no longer than 1 second) based on a historical observed one. However, such simpliﬁcation may fail to meet practical needs due to the neglect of the fact that motion prediction in real applications is not an isolated
“observe then predict” unit, but a consecutive process com-posed of many rounds of such unit, semi-overlapped along the entire sequence. As time goes on, the predicted part of previous round has its corresponding ground truth ob-servable in the new round, but their deviation in-between is neither exploited nor able to be captured by existing iso-lated learning fashion. In this paper, we propose DeFeeNet, a simple yet effective network that can be added on exist-ing one-off prediction models to realize deviation percep-tion and feedback when applied to consecutive motion pre-diction task. At each prediction round, the deviation gen-erated by previous unit is ﬁrst encoded by our DeFeeNet, and then incorporated into the existing predictor to enable a deviation-aware prediction manner, which, for the ﬁrst time, allows for information transmit across adjacent prediction units. We design two versions of DeFeeNet as MLP-based and GRU-based, respectively. On Human3.6M and more complicated BABEL, experimental results indicate that our proposed network improves consecutive human motion pre-diction performance regardless of the basic model. 1.

Introduction
In the age of intelligence, humans have to share a com-mon space with robots, machines or autonomous systems for a sustained period of time, such as in human-motion col-laboration [33], motion tracking [10] and autonomous driv-ing [38] scenarios. To satisfy human needs while keeping their safety, deterministic human motion prediction, which is aimed at forecasting future human pose sequence given historical observations, has become a research hotspot and already formed a relatively complete implement procedure.
As human poses may become less predictable over time, current works abstract the practical needs into a simpliﬁed task of learning to “observe a few frames and then predict the following ones”, with the prediction length mostly set to ≤ 1 second [4, 7–9, 16, 20, 21, 24, 27, 28, 34, 40].
Essentially, such simpliﬁed prediction task can be re-garded as a one-off acquired target limited within the short, isolated “observe then predict” unit. Nevertheless, this unit is actually not applicable in reality that requires consecu-tive observation and prediction on humans during the long period of human-robot/machine coexistence. Though, intu-itively, sliding such unit round by round along the time may roughly satisfy the need for consecutive prediction, one ne-glected fact is that each round of prediction unit is arranged in a semi-overlapped structure (see Figure 1). As time goes on, what was predicted before has its corresponding ground truth observable now, but their deviation in-between (i.e., mistake) remains unexplored.
Our key insight lies in that robots/machines should be able to detect and learn from the mistakes they have made.
Due to the inherent continuity and consistency of human motion data, such information would be very powerful to improve future prediction accuracy. The semi-overlapped, multi-round unit structure offers a natural way to transmit deviation feedback across adjacent prediction units, which, however, are unable to be realized by current one-off unit prediction strategy.
Based on this situation, in this paper, we propose De-FeeNet, a simple yet effective network which can be added on existing one-off human motion prediction models to im-plement Deviation perception and Feedback when applied to consecutive prediction. By mining the element “devia-tion” that neglected in previous works, we introduce induc-tive bias, where DeFeeNet can learn to derive certain “pat-terns” from past deviations and then constrain the model to make better predictions. To be speciﬁc, our DeFeeNet is constructed in two versions: MLP-based version containing one temporal-mixing MLP and one spatial-mixing MLP;
GRU-based version containing one-layer GRU with fully-connected layers only for dimension alignment. At each prediction round, DeFeeNet serves as an additional branch inserted into the existing predictor, which encodes the de-viation of the previous unit into latent representation and then transmits it into the main pipeline. In summary, our contribution are as follows:
• We mine the element “deviation” that neglected in ex-isting human motion prediction works, extending cur-rent within-unit research horizon to cross-unit, which, for the ﬁrst time, allows for information transmit across adjacent units.
• We propose DeFeeNet, a simple yet effective network that can be added on existing motion prediction models to enable consecutive prediction (i) with ﬂexible round number and (ii) in a deviation-aware manner. It can learn to derive certain patterns from past mistakes and constrain the model to make better predictions. man3.6M [15], as well as a more recent and challeng-ing dataset BABEL [32] that contains samples with different actions and their transitions. 2.