Abstract horse man glasses
Background man horse glasses
Background
Scene graph generation aims to construct a semantic graph structure from an image such that its nodes and edges respectively represent objects and their relationships. One of the major challenges for the task lies in the presence of distracting objects and relationships in images; contex-tual reasoning is strongly distracted by irrelevant objects or backgrounds and, more importantly, a vast number of irrel-evant candidate relations. To tackle the issue, we propose the Selective Quad Attention Network (SQUAT) that learns to select relevant object pairs and disambiguate them via di-verse contextual interactions. SQUAT consists of two main components: edge selection and quad attention. The edge selection module selects relevant object pairs, i.e., edges in the scene graph, which helps contextual reasoning, and the quad attention module then updates the edge features us-ing both edge-to-node and edge-to-edge cross-attentions to capture contextual information between objects and object pairs. Experiments demonstrate the strong performance and robustness of SQUAT, achieving the state of the art on the Visual Genome and Open Images v6 benchmarks. 1.

Introduction
The task of scene graph generation (SGG) is to construct a visually-grounded graph from an image such that its nodes and edges respectively represent objects and their relation-ships in the image [27, 43, 46]. The scene graph provides a semantic structure of images beyond individual objects and thus is useful for a wide range of vision problems such as visual question answering [36, 37], image captioning [53], image retrieval [11], and conditional image generation [10], where a holistic understanding of the relationships among objects is required for high-level reasoning. With recent ad-vances in deep neural networks for visual recognition, SGG has been actively investigated in the computer vision com-munity. A vast majority of existing methods tackle SGG by
ﬁrst detecting candidate objects and then performing con-textual reasoning between the objects via message pass-