Abstract
Discriminating known from unknown objects is an im-portant essential ability for human beings. To simulate this ability, a task of unsupervised out-of-distribution object de-tection (OOD-OD) is proposed to detect the objects that are never-seen-before during model training, which is ben-eficial for promoting the safe deployment of object detec-tors. Due to lacking unknown data for supervision, for this task, the main challenge lies in how to leverage the known in-distribution (ID) data to improve the detector’s discrim-ination ability.
In this paper, we first propose a method of Structure-Enhanced Recurrent Variational AutoEncoder (SR-VAE), which mainly consists of two dedicated recurrent
VAE branches. Specifically, to boost the performance of ob-ject localization, we explore utilizing the classical Lapla-cian of Gaussian (LoG) operator to enhance the structure information in the extracted low-level features. Meanwhile, we design a VAE branch that recurrently generates the aug-mentation of the classification features to strengthen the dis-crimination ability of the object classifier. Finally, to alle-viate the impact of lacking unknown data, another cycle-consistent conditional VAE branch is proposed to synthesize virtual OOD features that deviate from the distribution of
ID features, which improves the capability of distinguishing
OOD objects. In the experiments, our method is evaluated on OOD-OD, open-vocabulary detection, and incremental object detection. The significant performance gains over baselines show the superiorities of our method. The code will be released at https://github.com/AmingWu/SR-VAE. 1.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the rapid development of deep learning based object detection [5,12,34,36,41], which often follows a close-set assumption that the training and testing processes share the same category space. How-ever, the practical scenario is open and filled with unknown
*Corresponding author.
Figure 1. Discriminating known from unknown objects (as shown in green boxes) by synthesizing virtual OOD features. For OOD-OD, to alleviate the impact of lacking unknown data, we present an
SR-VAE method to constrain the synthesized features (as shown in blue stars) to deviate from the distribution of ID features (as shown in orange). Meanwhile, we consider enhancing the discrimination of the classifier to reduce the risk of misclassifying the ID objects into the OOD category. Through these operations, the ability of distinguishing OOD objects could be improved significantly. objects, e.g., in Fig. 1, an autonomous vehicle may en-counter an unseen camel, presenting significant challenges for close-set assumption based detectors. To promote the safe application of detectors, a task of unsupervised out-of-distribution object detection (OOD-OD) [7] is recently pro-posed, which aims to detect the objects never-seen-before during training without accessing any auxiliary data.
Towards unsupervised OOD-OD, since there is no aux-iliary data available for supervision, leveraging the known in-distribution (ID) data to enhance the detector’s discrimi-nation ability becomes the critical challenge. One feasible solution is to synthesize a series of virtual OOD features
[7, 35] based on the ID data, which is beneficial for pro-moting the object detector to learn a clear decision bound-ary between ID and OOD objects. To this end, the work
[7] attempts to synthesize virtual features from the low-likelihood region of the estimated class-conditional distri-bution. However, this method requires a large number of objects for each category to estimate the distribution, limit-ing its application to the case of few samples.
As shown in Fig. 1, in this paper, we consider improv-ing the performance of OOD object detection from two per-spectives: One is to strengthen the discrimination capabil-ity of the object classifier for the known ID objects, which is conducive to reduce the risk of misclassifying the ID ob-jects into the OOD category. Another is to synthesize the virtual OOD features that significantly deviate from the dis-tribution of the ID features, which is instrumental in boost-ing the performance of distinguishing OOD objects from
ID objects. To attain these two goals, we explore exploiting
Variational AutoEncoder (VAE) [15, 20] to separately gen-erate the augmented ID features and virtual OOD features.
Specifically, an approach of Structure-Enhanced Recur-rent Variational AutoEncoder (SR-VAE) is proposed, which mainly consists of two dedicated recurrent VAE branches.
In general, an object detector should first localize objects.
Then, an object classifier is used to discriminate these ob-jects [12, 36]. To improve the localization performance, en-hancing the object-related information in the extracted fea-tures is meaningful. To this end, after extracting the low-level features of an input image, we present to utilize the classical Laplacian of Gaussian (LoG) operator [23] to ob-tain structure-related information, which is used to fuse into the existing features to strengthen the localization ability.
Next, in order to enhance the discrimination ability, in-spired by Invariant Risk Minimization [1], we explore con-structing a set of diverse environments to intensify the vari-ance of the input classification features. Concretely, a VAE module [17, 20, 43] is exploited to recurrently output mul-tiple augmented features of the classification features, i.e., the current output is taken as the input of the next iteration.
Since the input of each iteration is different, by means of the variation operation, the diversity of the output features could be enlarged. Then, the discrimination ability is im-proved by minimizing the prediction discrepancy between the augmented features and the classification features.
Finally, to alleviate the impact of lacking unknown data, we present a cycle-consistent conditional VAE [40] to syn-thesize virtual OOD features in the absence of paired super-vision samples. Concretely, to ameliorate the synthesized features to deviate from the distribution of ID features, we first insert label information in the latent space to force a de-terministic constrained representation. Meanwhile, by max-imizing the discrepancy between the synthesized features and the input features, the synthesized features could be facilitated to contain plentiful OOD-relevant information, which enhances the ability of distinguishing OOD objects.
In the experiments, our method is separately evaluated on three different tasks. Extensive experimental results on mul-tiple datasets demonstrate the superiorities of our method.
The contributions are summarized as follows: (1) For unsupervised OOD-OD, we observe that using the classical LoG operator could effectively enhance object-related information in the extracted low-level features. (2) To reduce the risk of misclassifying ID objects into the OOD category, we design a dedicated recurrent VAE to generate diverse augmented features of the input classifica-tion features, which is beneficial for improving the discrim-ination ability of the object classifier. (3) To alleviate the impact of lacking unknown data for supervision, we present a cycle-consistent conditional VAE to synthesize virtual OOD features, which is instrumental in distinguishing OOD objects from ID objects. (4) In the experiments, our method is evaluated on OOD-OD [7], open-vocabulary detection [33, 49], and incremen-tal object detection [22, 39]. Particularly, for OpenImages dataset [24], compared with the baseline method [7], our method significantly reduces FPR95 by around 13.73%. 2.