Abstract
In the ﬁeld of human pose estimation, regression-based methods have been dominated in terms of speed, while heatmap-based methods are far ahead in terms of per-formance. How to take advantage of both schemes re-In this paper, we propose mains a challenging problem. a novel human pose estimation framework termed Distil-Pose, which bridges the gaps between heatmap-based and regression-based methods. Speciﬁcally, DistilPose maxi-mizes the transfer of knowledge from the teacher model (heatmap-based) to the student model (regression-based) through Token-distilling Encoder (TDE) and Simulated
Heatmaps. TDE aligns the feature spaces of heatmap-based and regression-based models by introducing tok-enization, while Simulated Heatmaps transfer explicit guid-ance (distribution and conﬁdence) from teacher heatmaps into student models. Extensive experiments show that the proposed DistilPose can signiﬁcantly improve the perfor-mance of the regression-based models while maintaining ef-ﬁciency. Speciﬁcally, on the MSCOCO validation dataset,
DistilPose-S obtains 71.6% mAP with 5.36M parameters, 2.38 GFLOPs, and 40.2 FPS, which saves 12.95×, 7.16× computational cost and is 4.9× faster than its teacher model with only 0.9 points performance drop. Furthermore,
DistilPose-L obtains 74.4% mAP on MSCOCO validation dataset, achieving a new state-of-the-art among predomi-nant regression-based models. Code will be available at https://github.com/yshMars/DistilPose. 1.

Introduction 2D Human Pose Estimation (HPE) aims to detect the anatomical joints of a human in a given image to estimate the poses. HPE is typically used as a preprocessing mod-ule that participates in many downstream tasks, such as ac-tivity recognition [28, 31], human motion analysis [1], mo-∗ Equal contribution. This work was done when Suhang Ye was an intern at Tencent Youtu Lab.
† Corresponding author: zsc_2016@xmu.edu.cn
)
% (
P
A 78 76 74 72 70 68 66 64 62 60
DistilPose-L(ours)
RLE-HRNet-W48[7]
PRTR-HRNet-W32[8]
DistilPose-S(ours)
SimpleBaseline-Res50[28]
RLE-Res50[7]
PRTR-Res50[8]
SimpleBaseline-Res152[28]
Diameter 0 5 10 15
GFLOPs 20 0 10 20 30 40 50
Parameter 60 70 80 90
Figure 1. Comparisons between the SOTA methods and the proposed DistilPose on MSCOCO val dataset. Red circles at the upper left corner denote DistilPose. DistilPose outperforms SOTA models in terms of accuracy (AP), Parameter and computational cost (GFLOPs). tion capture [16], etc. Previous studies on 2D HPE can be mainly divided into two mainstreams: heatmap-based and regression-based methods. Regression-based methods have signiﬁcant advantages in speed and are well-suited for mobile devices. However, the insufﬁcient accuracy of re-gression models will affect the performance of downstream tasks.
In contrast, heatmap-based methods can explicitly learn spatial information by estimating likelihood heatmaps, resulting in high accuracy on HPE tasks. But the estimation of likelihood heatmaps requires exceptionally high compu-tational cost, which leads to slow preprocessing operations.
Thus, how to take advantages of both heatmap-based and regression-based methods remains a challenging problem.
One possible way to solve the above problem is to trans-fer the knowledge from heatmap-based to regression-based models [8, 23]. However, due to the different output spaces of regression models and heatmap models (the former is a vector, and the latter is a heatmap), transferring knowl-edge between heatmaps and vectors faces the following two problems: (1) The regression head usually vectorizes the feature map output by the backbone. And much spatial information will be lost through Global Average Pooling
(GAP) or Flatten operation. Thus, previous work failed to transfer heatmap knowledge to regression models fully. (2) Compared to the coordinate regression, heatmaps natu-rally contain shape, position, and gradient information [3].
Due to the lack of explicit guidance for such information, regression-based methods are more difﬁcult to learn the implicit relationship between features and keypoints than heatmap-based methods.
In this paper, we propose a novel human pose esti-mation framework, DistilPose, which learns to transfer the heatmap-based knowledge from a teacher model to a regression-based student model. DistilPose mainly includes the following two components: (1) A knowledge-transferring module called Token-distilling Encoder (TDE) is designed to align the feature spaces of heatmap-based and regression-based models by introducing tokenization, which consists of a series of trans-former encoders. TDE can capture the relationship between keypoints and feature maps/other keypoints [10,32]. (2) We propose to simulate heatmaps to obtain the heatmap infor-mation for regression-based students explicitly. The result-ing Simulated Heatmaps provide two explicit guidelines, including each keypoint’s 2D distribution and conﬁdence.
Note that the proposed Simulated Heatmaps can be inserted between any heatmap-based and regression-based methods to transfer heatmap knowledge to regression models. (SOTA) achieves
DistilPose comparable performance to heatmap-based models with less computational cost and surpasses the state-of-the-art regression-based methods. Speciﬁcally, on the MSCOCO validation dataset,
DistilPose-S achieves 71.6% mAP with 5.36M parameters, 2.38 GFLOPs and 40.3 FPS. DistilPose-L achieves 74.4% mAP with 21.27M parameters and 10.33 GFLOPs, which outperforms its heatmap-based teacher model in perfor-mance, parameters and computational cost.
In summary,
DistilPose signiﬁcantly reduces the computation while achieving competitive accuracy, bringing advantages from both heatmap-based and regression-based schemes. As shown in Figure 1, DistilPose outperforms previous SOTA regression-based methods, such as RLE [8] and PRTR [9] with fewer parameters and GFLOPs.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel human pose estimation frame-work, DistilPose, which is the ﬁrst work to trans-fer knowledge between heatmap-based and regression-based models losslessly.
• We introduce a novel Token-distilling Encoder (TDE) to take advantage of both heatmap-based and regression-based models. With the proposed TDE, the gap between the output space of heatmaps and coordi-nate vectors can be facilitated in a tokenized manner.
• We propose Simulated Heatmaps to model explicit heatmap information, including 2D keypoint distribu-tions and keypoint conﬁdences. With the aid of Sim-ulated Heatmaps, we can transform the regression-based HPE task into a more straightforward learn-ing task that fully exploits local information. Simu-lated Heatmaps can be applied to any heatmap-based and regression-based models for transferring heatmap knowledge to regression models. 2.