Abstract
Humans have the innate capability to answer diverse questions, which is rooted in the natural ability to corre-late different concepts based on their semantic relationships and decompose difficult problems into sub-tasks. On the contrary, existing visual reasoning methods assume train-ing samples that capture every possible object and reason-ing problem, and rely on black-boxed models that com-monly exploit statistical priors. They have yet to develop the capability to address novel objects or spurious biases in real-world scenarios, and also fall short of interpret-ing the rationales behind their decisions. Inspired by hu-mans’ reasoning of the visual world, we tackle the afore-mentioned challenges from a compositional perspective, and propose an integral framework consisting of a princi-pled object factorization method and a novel neural mod-ule network. Our factorization method decomposes objects based on their key characteristics, and automatically de-rives prototypes that represent a wide range of objects. With these prototypes encoding important semantics, the pro-posed network then correlates objects by measuring their similarity on a common semantic space and makes deci-It is ca-sions with a compositional reasoning process. pable of answering questions with diverse objects regard-less of their availability during training, and overcoming the issues of biased question-answer distributions. In addi-tion to the enhanced generalizability, our framework also provides an interpretable interface for understanding the decision-making process of models. Our code is available at https://github.com/szzexpoi/POEM . 1.

Introduction
One of the fundamental goals in artificial intelligence is to develop systems that are able to reason with the com-plexity of real-world data to make decisions. Most existing visual question answering (VQA) methods [2,13,28,29,33, 34, 38, 49, 57] assume a complete overlap between objects involved in training and testing, and commonly rely on the spurious distributions of questions and answers [39]. As a result, they have limited generalizability toward real-life visual reasoning, and also lack the ability to justify the rea-soning process that leads to the answers.
“All mammals are animals. All elephants are mammals.
Therefore, all elephants are animals [5].” The wide ap-plication of syllogistic logic reflects key characteristics of the ways humans reason about the world. Unlike models
[2, 38, 49] that utilize implicit features and heavily exploit statistical priors, humans correlate diverse objects from the compositional perspective based on their shared character-istics [26] and tackle problems with a structured reasoning process, which is both generalizable and interpretable.
To address the complexity of real-world problems, this study aims to develop object factorization and composi-tional reasoning capabilities in models. As shown in Figure 1, our approach bridges diverse objects by projecting them onto a common space formed by discriminative prototypes (e.g., round shape, stuffed toy), and formulates the reason-ing process with atomic steps [48] representing essential reasoning skills (e.g., Find, Relate). The prototypes are de-rived with object factorization, and they represent important semantics of objects (e.g., honey jar → <round shape, con-tainer ...>, teddy bear → <bear, stuffed toy ...>). With an improved understanding of semantic relationships, our framework correlates objects (e.g., honey jar and container, stuffed toy and teddy bear) based on their commonalities in characteristics, leading to enhanced robustness against the diversity of objects and data biases. It also allows interpre-tations of the model’s reasoning process consistent with the ways humans describe their own thinking [8].
Compared to previous studies [2, 21, 33, 34, 48, 49], our major distinction lies in (1) the composition in two impor-tant dimensions of visual reasoning, i.e., objects and the reasoning process, and (2) a tight coupling between them.
Instead of using black-boxed features or a direct mapping between question and answer that is vulnerable to object di-Figure 1. Overview of our method that represents objects with semantically meaningful prototypes and makes decisions via an explicit reasoning process. Honey jar is a novel object unseen during training. Note that our prototypes are not limited to a set of manually defined categories, but learned from factorizing objects to encode broader characteristics (e.g., shapes, colors, object categories). versity or data biases, our method decomposes objects into bases representing discriminative semantics, and develops a prototypical neural module network to explicitly bridge objects with a compositional reasoning paradigm. The pro-posed method naturally approaches generalizability with its compositional nature, handling novel objects and variable data distributions. It also provides a transparent interface for interpreting how models parse objects based on their characteristics and incorporate them for visual reasoning.
To summarize, our major contributions are as follows: 1. We identify the significance of tightly coupling the compositionality between objects and the reasoning process, and for the first time investigate its effective-ness in generalizable and interpretable reasoning. 2. We propose a principled method that automatically de-rives prototypes with object factorization, which plays a key role in encoding key characteristics of objects. 3. We develop a new neural module network that adap-tively reasons on the commonalities of different ob-jects along a structured decision-making process. 4. We perform extensive analyses to shed light on the roles of compositionality in reasoning with novel ob-jects and variable data distributions. 2.