Abstract
Cell instance segmentation in cytology images has sig-nificant importance for biology analysis and cancer screen-ing, while remains challenging due to 1) the extensive over-lapping translucent cell clusters that cause the ambigu-ous boundaries, and 2) the confusion of mimics and de-bris as nuclei. In this work, we proposed a De-overlapping
Network (DoNet) in a decompose-and-recombined strat-egy. A Dual-path Region Segmentation Module (DRM) ex-plicitly decomposes the cell clusters into intersection and complement regions, followed by a Semantic Consistency-guided Recombination Module (CRM) for integration. To further introduce the containment relationship of the nu-cleus in the cytoplasm, we design a Mask-guided Region
Proposal Strategy (MRP) that integrates the cell attention maps for inner-cell instance prediction. We validate the proposed approach on ISBI2014 and CPS datasets. Ex-periments show that our proposed DoNet significantly out-performs other state-of-the-art (SOTA) cell instance seg-mentation methods. The code is available at https:
//github.com/DeepDoNet/DoNet. 1.

Introduction
Cytology image has been essential for cancer screen-ing and earlier diagnosis, such as qualitative and quan-titative identification of cellular morphology, nuclei size, nuclear-cytoplasmic ratio, and other cytological features
[12, 15, 25]. However, examining tens of thousands of cells under the microscope visually is inherently tedious and suf-fers from inter-/intra-observer variability. Computational techniques enable efficient and accurate characterization of cells from cytology images [12, 16]. Among all computa-tional techniques, cell segmentation has been a fundamental and widely-studied task, since the acquisition of cell-level identification is a pre-requisition for further assessment and analysis [3, 23].
*Equal contribution
†Corresponding author
Figure 1. The schematic illustration of proposed DoNet with decompose-and-recombined strategy, which maps each overlap-ping cell into the intersection, complement, and instance layers to address the overlapping issue in cytology instance segmentation.
Deep Learning (DL) methods show promising results for cell-nuclei segmentation in the histopathology image
[5,6,14,17]. However, cytology segmentation remains chal-lenging for the following two reasons. Firstly, cells in a cy-tology image are prone to cluster with each other, leading to the overlapping issue. In the cytology images, the translu-cent cytoplasm of the cell (seen in Figure 1) tends to oc-clude each other with low contrast staining, leading to am-biguous cellular boundary predictions. This phenomenon is particularly evident in cervical cell images. Secondly, hard mimics, are widespread in the background, along with other technical artefacts such as bubbles, which could mis-lead the instance segmentation models [4]. Take the cervical cell image as an example, the widespread white blood cells and mucus stains lead to false predictions for nuclei. To ad-dress these challenges, several works [24, 33] propose the segment-then-refine paradigm, while others [39, 40] utilize the detection-based framework, e.g., Mask R-CNN [11].
However, they fail to model the interaction between inter-section and complement sub-regions within the translucent cell cluster explicitly, resulting in a limited understanding of cross-region relationships.
Amodal instance segmentation tackles the occlusion
problem by inferring the integral object based on the par-tially visible region [22]. Based on the fact that humans can infer the occluded region of an object despite the am-biguity, these methods attempt to learn the integrated ob-ject mask (amodal mask) for better occlusion reasoning ca-pability [9, 37] via synthesizing occluded data label pairs and aggregating global information to enhance perceptual ability. Compared to natural scenes, cell instances in cy-tology images are mostly semi-transparent. Therefore, an occlusion (overlapping) region exits in both the occluding and occluded instances. However, treating semi-transparent overlapping regions as general occlusion regions is not op-timal, since they have different appearances compared to non-overlapping regions, and could in fact provides richer shape information than general occlusion regions.
Motivated by the amodal perception, we propose a decompose-and-recombine strategy for translucent cell instance segmentation, named De-overlapping Network (DoNet). Figure 1 provides the schematic diagram. For each cell cluster with more than one cellular sub-region,
DoNet starts from implicitly learning the hidden interaction of sub-regions by predicting instance masks from clusters.
Then, it explicitly models the components and their rela-tionships via the intersection layer, complement layer, and instance layer, to enhance its perceptual capability.
Initially, we adopt Mask R-CNN to get the coarse predic-tions, followed by a novel Dual-path Region segmentation
Module (DRM) that combines features and coarse masks from the first stage to decompose cell clusters into inter-section and complement sub-regions. Then, the semantic
Consistency-guided Recombination Module (CRM) is de-signed to encourage consistency between the refined in-stances and integral sub-region predictions. Furthermore, to impose the morphological constraint that nuclei stay in-side the cellular regions, we propose a Mask-guided Region
Proposal Module (MRP) to encourage the model to focus on the intra-cellular area during nuclei segmentation.
The overall contributions are summarized as follows:
• A novel de-overlapping network for cell instance seg-mentation with a decompose-and-recombined strategy, decomposing the cell regions with the DRM, as well as implicitly and explicitly modeling the semantic re-lationship between intersection, complement, and in-stance (cell) components via the CRM. These designs equip the network with enhanced perceptual capability in overlapping cellular sub-regions.
• A mask-guided region proposal module (MRP) that leverages the cytoplasm attention map for the intra-cellular nuclei refinement, which imposes the biology prior of cellular instances into the module, effectively mitigating the influence of mimickers widespread in the background.
• Extensive experiments on two overlapping cytology image segmentation datasets, namely ISBI2014 [24] and CPS [39], demonstrating that our proposed DoNet outperforms other state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods by a large margin. 2.