Abstract 1.

Introduction
Recent approaches to drape garments quickly over arbi-trary human bodies leverage self-supervision to eliminate the need for large training sets. However, they are designed to train one network per clothing item, which severely lim-its their generalization abilities. In our work, we rely on self-supervision to train a single network to drape multiple garments. This is achieved by predicting a 3D deformation
ﬁeld conditioned on the latent codes of a generative net-work, which models garments as unsigned distance ﬁelds.
Our pipeline can generate and drape previously unseen garments of any topology, whose shape can be edited by ma-nipulating their latent codes. Being fully differentiable, our formulation makes it possible to recover accurate 3D mod-els of garments from partial observations – images or 3D scans – via gradient descent. Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/liren2515/DrapeNet.
∗ Equal contributions
Draping digital garments over differently-shaped bod-ies in random poses has been extensively studied due to its many applications such as fashion design, moviemak-ing, video gaming, virtual try-on and, nowadays, virtual and augmented reality. Physics-based simulation (PBS) [3, 12, 23, 32, 33, 38, 39, 47–49, 51, 60] can produce outstanding re-sults, but at a high computational cost.
Recent years have witnessed the emergence of deep neu-ral networks aiming to achieve the quality of PBS draping while being much faster, easily differentiable, and offer-ing new speed vs. accuracy tradeoffs [15, 16, 25, 36, 44, 46, 50, 53, 55]. These networks are often trained to pro-duce garments that resemble ground-truth ones. While ef-fective, this requires building training datasets, consisting of ground-truth meshes obtained either from computation-ally expensive simulations [31] or using complex 3D scan-ning setups [37]. Moreover, to generalize to unseen gar-ments and poses, these supervised approaches require train-ing databases encompassing a great variety of samples de-picting many combinations of garments, bodies and poses. 2.