Abstract
The remote photoplethysmography (rPPG) technique can estimate pulse-related metrics (e.g. heart rate and res-piratory rate) from facial videos and has a high potential for health monitoring. The latest deep rPPG methods can model in-distribution noise due to head motion, video com-pression, etc., and estimate high-quality rPPG signals un-der similar scenarios. However, deep rPPG models may not generalize well to the target test domain with unseen noise and distortions. In this paper, to improve the general-ization ability of rPPG models, we propose a dual-bridging network to reduce the domain discrepancy by aligning in-termediate domains and synthesizing the target noise in the source domain for better noise reduction. To comprehen-sively explore the target domain noise, we propose a novel adversarial noise generation in which the noise generator indirectly competes with the noise reducer. To further im-prove the robustness of the noise reducer, we propose hard noise pattern mining to encourage the generator to learn hard noise patterns contained in the target domain features.
We evaluated the proposed method on three public datasets with different types of interferences. Under different cross-domain scenarios, the comprehensive results show the ef-fectiveness of our method. 1.

Introduction
With the development of rPPG technology, physiolog-ical metrics such as heart rate [27], heart rate variabil-ity [34], respiratory rate [21] can also be estimated from fa-cial videos. Deep learning-based rPPG methods overcome non-physiological intensity variations [30, 49] and model noise in training samples [24, 28]. Despite the high accu-racy under intra-dataset evaluations, the deep rPPG models may not be able to generalize well to unseen interferences in the test domain. The domain gap is mainly from unseen non-physiological interferences such as lighting conditions,
* Equal contribution
Figure 1. The comparison between (a) typical intra-dataset ad-versarial rPPG noise modeling, (b) an intuitive UDA framework for rPPG feature alignment, and (c) our proposed dual-bridging network with adversarial noise modeling and hard noise pattern mining (HM ). Here SYN denotes synthetic data, DT is for the denoised target domain, G, D, and N R denotes the generator, do-main classifier, and noise reducer, respectively. camera sensors, video compression algorithms, facial ex-pressions, etc. They can induce distortions in estimated rPPG signals and reduce both the accuracy and the relia-bility of pulse-related metrics estimation. Considering it is hard to cover all interferences during the training stage, to improve the usability of rPPG in realistic applications, one main challenge is how to boost the generalizability of rPPG models to unseen scenarios.
In recent research of rPPG, both deep learning-based frameworks and mechanisms [45, 46, 49] are proposed to overcome the non-physiological intensity variations. GAN-based disentanglement learning has also been adopted to re-duce the noise from pseudo [28] or synthesized [24] noisy features. We summarize this approach in Figure 1 (a) where a discriminator is employed to distinguish the generated feature (SYN in figure) from the original one. These meth-ods can perform well under intra-dataset evaluation settings since the in-distribution noise patterns are thoroughly in-vestigated with a large number of adversarial learning iter-ations. However, they may fail when encountering unseen
domains in real application scenarios since noise patterns may be different from the ones of training data.
Intuitively, the unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) technique can help in bridging the gap between source and target domain [7, 14, 17, 44]. As shown in Figure 1 (b), a noise reducer module N R that aims to obtain noise-free domain-invariant representations can be learned by fight-ing against the domain classifier D. However, this intuitive solution may not work well since the domain classification may not be able to give sufficient information for N R to identify whether the feature components are noise or phys-iological information. Directly aligning the rPPG features from different domains may end up distorting the physio-logical information since they are from different subjects.
The ground-truth PPG (GT-PPG) signal with detailed wave-form information helps preserve the physiological informa-tion and can provide much more informative guidance with the regression task. However, GT-PPG is available in the source domain but not the target domain. How to leverage the source domain GT-PPG to train N R to be robust to the noise from the target domain is the key issue to be solved in this work. To achieve it we propose the dual bridging noise modeling network as shown in Figure 1 (c). The first bridg-ing works as high-level guidance where the denoised target domain feature is adversarially pulled to the source domain feature (as Figure 1 (b)). On top of it, the second bridging aims to help synthesize the target domain noise and inject it into the source domain denoised feature so that the GT-PPG regression can help finetune the N R for better robustness in the target domain. An adversarial noise generation module (G|N R) is designed where the generator is conditioned on the N R so that it keeps on overcoming the complex noise pattern that can hardly be solved in the first bridging. With the high-level guidance (first bridging) and detailed signal regression (second bridging), the N R can handle the target domain noise better and therefore improve the accuracy of rPPG estimation in the target domain. To further discover the remaining noise vestige, we build a hard noise pattern mining mechanism to squeeze the unsolved local noise pat-tern from the denoised target feature so that G|N R can thor-oughly synthesize it.
In sum, the contributions of this work are: (1) A dual-bridging noise modeling network that adapts target domain noise in a coarse-to-fine manner. (2) An adversarial noise generation mechanism to progressively synthesize and in-ject the hard target domain noisy features into the source (3) domain while keeping the physiological information.
A hard noise pattern mining mechanism to further explore the target domain noise patterns with larger variations. We evaluated the proposed method on three public datasets with various types of interferences including facial motion and expression, video compression, skin tone, and heartbeat ranges. Under different cross-domain scenarios, the com-prehensive results show the effectiveness of our method. 2.