Abstract
With the springing up of face synthesis techniques, it is prominent in need to develop powerful face forgery de-tection methods due to security concerns. Some existing methods attempt to employ auxiliary frequency-aware in-formation combined with CNN backbones to discover the forged clues. Due to the inadequate information inter-action with image content, the extracted frequency fea-tures are thus spatially irrelavant, struggling to general-ize well on increasingly realistic counterfeit types. To ad-dress this issue, we propose a Spatial-Frequency Dynamic
Graph method to exploit the relation-aware features in spa-tial and frequency domains via dynamic graph learning. To this end, we introduce three well-designed components: 1)
Content-guided Adaptive Frequency Extraction module to mine the content-adaptive forged frequency clues. 2) Multi-ple Domains Attention Map Learning module to enrich the spatial-frequency contextual features with multiscale atten-tion maps. 3) Dynamic Graph Spatial-Frequency Feature
Fusion Network to explore the high-order relation of spa-tial and frequency features. Extensive experiments on sev-eral benchmark show that our proposed method sustainedly exceeds the state-of-the-arts by a considerable margin. 1.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the continuous advances in deepfake creation [11, 27, 36]. Utilizing booming open-source tools such as Deepfakes [41], novices can readily manipulate the expression and identity of faces to generate visually untraceable videos. Face forgery technology has stimulated many applications [12, 14, 44, 46] with wide ac-ceptance. These techniques can whereas be abused by ma-*Chen Chen is the corresponding author. This work is supported by the National Key R&D Program of China under Grant 2021YFF0602101,
Alibaba Group through Alibaba Research Intern Program.
SFDG-Detector
Spat.
Freq.
Spat.
Freq. (cid:28431)a(cid:28432)SFDG Framework (cid:28431)b(cid:28432)C (cid:28431)b(cid:28432)Correlation Heatmap l ti H t (cid:28431)c(cid:28432)Graph Reasoning
Figure 1. The motivation of our proposed approach. Our SFDG method (a) delves into the high-order relationships (b) of spatial and frequency domain via cross-domain graph reasoning (c). licious intentions to make pornographic movies, fake news and political rumors. In the circumstances, it is desperately in need to develop powerful forgery detection methods.
Early face forgery detection methods [7,30, 52] treat this challenge as vanilla dichotomy tasks in the prevailing view.
They use off-the-shelf backbones to extract the global fea-ture of faces and a binary classiﬁer follow-up to identify the real and counterfeit faces. However, as the counter-feits become increasingly realistic, it is intractable for these methods to spot subtle and local forgery traces. One recent study [50] reformulates deepfake detection as a ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation task and designs a multi-attentional frame-work to extract local discriminative features from multiple attention maps. It is susceptible to common disturbances and the generalized features remain therefore poorly un-derstood. Some other works resort to speciﬁc forgery pat-terns to encourage better classiﬁcation such as DCT [24,28],
SRM [25] and steganalysis features [45]. Although promis-ing advances have been achieved by these previous works,
they always extract frequency features with hand-crafted
ﬁlter banks which are content-irrelevant, thus incapable to adapt the changes of complex scenarios. Moreover, they fuse multi-domain information via adding directly or atten-tional projection. However, these approaches devote little efforts to discover the high-order relation of spatial and fre-quency features and integrating them in a reasonable way.
In this paper, we provide seminal insights to exploit adaptive frequency features and delve into the interactions of spatial-frequency domains. To this end, we propose an adaptive extraction-multiscale enhancement-graph fusion paradigm for deepfake detection via dynamic graph learn-ing, which prompts to excavate content-aware frequency clues and the high-order relation of multiple domains.
Firstly, for adaptive frequency extraction, we tailor a
Content-guided Adaptive Frequency Extraction (CAF ´E) module with coarse-grained DCT and ﬁne-grained DCT to capture the local frequency cues guided by content-aware masks. Different from PEL [9] and F3Net [28], our cus-tomized frequency learning protocol provides potential for more combinations of frequency features, which is indis-pensable to spot complicated counterfeit patterns.
To further enhance the representation of content-guided frequency features, we introduce a Multiple Domains At-tention Map Learning (MDAML) module to generate mul-tiscale spatial and frequency attention maps with high-level semantic features. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst propose a Multi-Scale Attention Ensemble (MSAE) module, which pro-duces multi-scale semantic attention maps with large re-ceptive ﬁelds and endows rich contextual information to spatial and frequency domains. Moreover, an Attention
Map Reﬁnement Block (AMRB) is included in the MSAE module to reﬁne the obtained semantic attention maps con-ducive to the following feature learning. In comparison with
MADD [50] that merely emphasizes the spatial domain, we further introduce the semantic-relevant frequency attention map with rich semantic information retained for the subse-quent spatial-frequency relation-discovery paradigm.
Finally, to fully discover the spatial and frequency re-lationships, we propose a Dynamic Graph-based Spatial-Frequency Feature Fusion network (DG-SF3Net) to formu-late the interaction of two domains via a graph-based rela-tion discovery protocol. Speciﬁcally, DG-SF3Net is com-posed of two ingredients: Dynamic GCN [16] and Graph
Information Interaction layers. The former constructs kNN-graph dynamically and performs graph convolution to rea-son high-order relationships in spatial and frequency do-mains, while the latter is designed to enhance the mutual relation with several graph-weighted MLP-Mixer [40] lay-ers via channel-wise and node-wise interaction.
The achievements, including contributions are threefold:
• From a new perspective, we propose a novel Spatial-Frequency Dynamic Graph (SFDG) framework, which is qualiﬁed to exploit relation-aware spatial-frequency features to promote generalized forgery detection.
• We ﬁrst harness a CAF ´E module for content-aware fre-quency feature extraction, and then tailor an MDAML scheme to dig deeper into multiscale spatial-frequency attention maps with rich contextual understanding of forgeries. Finally, a seminal DG-SF3Net module is proposed to discover the multi-domain relationships with a graph-based relation-reasoning approach.
• Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on six benchmark datasets. The cross-dataset experiment and the perturbation analysis show the robustness and generalization ability of the proposed SFDG method. 2.