Abstract
Digital image authenticity has promoted research on im-age forgery localization. Although deep learning-based methods achieve remarkable progress, most of them usu-ally suffer from severe feature coupling between the forged and authentic regions. In this work, we propose a two-step
Edge-aware Regional Message Passing Controlling strat-egy to address the above issue. Specifically, the first step is to account for fully exploiting the edge information. It consists of two core designs: context-enhanced graph con-struction and threshold-adaptive differentiable binarization edge algorithm. The former assembles the global semantic information to distinguish the features between the forged and authentic regions, while the latter stands on the output of the former to provide the learnable edges. In the sec-ond step, guided by the learnable edges, a region message passing controller is devised to weaken the message passing between the forged and authentic regions. In this way, our
ERMPC is capable of explicitly modeling the inconsistency between the forged and authentic regions and enabling it to perform well on refined forged images. Extensive exper-iments on several challenging benchmarks show that our method is superior to state-of-the-art image forgery local-ization methods qualitatively and quantitatively. 1.

Introduction
The forged or manipulated images pose risks in vari-ous fields, such as removing copyright watermarks, gener-ating fake news, and even falsifying evidence in court [32].
The growing technology of forgery will cause a crisis of trust and affect social equity. Therefore, the detection of image forgery is of great significance. The crucial aspect
∗ Co-first authors contributed equally, † corresponding author. This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China un-der Grant 2020AAA0105702, the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grants 62225207, 62276243, 62106245 and
U19B2038, the University Synergy Innovation Program of Anhui Province under Grant GXXT-2019-025.
Figure 1. The difference between previous methods and ours. Our method controls the message passing between the forged and au-thentic regions, ignored by the previous method. As shown by (cid:37). of the detection is to model the inconsistency between the forged and authentic regions and to locate the forged re-gions on the suspicious image, i.e., image forgery local-ization (IFL). However, as post-processing techniques such as GAN [16, 26, 63], VAE [27, 44] and homogeneous ma-nipulation [7, 33] are wildly utilized, images can be eas-ily tampered in a visually imperceptible way. These tech-niques constantly aim to couple the forged and authentic regions’ features, making image forgery localization chal-lenging. Therefore, in order to accurately locate the image forgery region, it is particularly essential to decouple the features between forged and authentic regions.
In recent years, deep-learning techniques have attracted more attention [23, 57, 58, 65, 66]. Due to the development of deep learning, image forgery localization has achieved remarkable results. For example, ManTra-Net [55] treats the forgery localization problem as a local anomaly detec-tion problem and proposes a novel long short-term mem-ory solution to assess local anomalies. To discriminate between heterologous regions, SPAN employs CNNs to extract anomalous local noise features from noise maps.
MVSS-Net [5] learns a multiview feature with multi-scale
supervised networks to jointly exploit the noise view and the boundary artifacts. However, these methods do not de-couple the features between the forged and authentic re-gions, making it difficult to locate the tampered regions for elaborately forged images accurately. As shown in Figure 1, in the previous method, the features of the forged region are coupled with some of the features of the authentic region, resulting in wrong localization.
In this work, we propose a novel method to avoid fea-ture coupling of the two regions (forged and authentic) for image forgery localization. One of the keys of this method is to construct a dynamic graph, where the edges between the forged and authentic regions participate in its construc-tion. We control the message passing of regions inside and outside the edges (i.e., forged and authentic) by reconstruct-ing the adjacency matrix of nodes inside and outside the edges, thus achieving effective disentanglement of the fea-tures between the forged and authentic regions. Based on its functionality, the edge-aware dynamic graph convolution is named the regional message passing controller (RMPC).
In order to use the proposed RMPC for image forgery localization, it is necessary to obtain the edge information between the forged and authentic regions, which is the other key of this method. Therefore, an edge reconstruction (ER) module was developed, including a context-enhanced graph (CEG) and a threshold-adaptive differentiable binarization module. We specially design an adjacency matrix learner in the CEG, which encodes global information along the nodes to assemble the global semantic information. Inspired by the Sigmoid function, we develop the threshold-adaptive differentiable binarization edge algorithm, which stands on the output of the CEG to provide the learnable edges.
In summary, in this work we propose a new two-step framework named Edge-aware Regional Message Passing
Controller (ERMPC) for Image Forgery Localization, in-cluding RMPC and ER. The ERMPC could effectively con-trol the message passing between the forged and authentic regions to achieve effective disentanglement of the two re-gions, thus boosting the performance of image forgery lo-calization. We take edge information as the main task and use it as a basis to explicitly model the inconsistency be-tween two regions. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first attempt to explicitly weaken the message passing between the forged and authentic regions. Our contributions are as follows:
• We propose ERMPC, a novel two-step coarse-to-fine framework for image forgery localization, explicitly modeling the inconsistency between the forged and au-thentic regions with edge information.
• We propose an edge-aware dynamic graph, also known as RMPC, to control the message passing between two regions (forged and authentic) in the feature map.
• We develop an edge reconstruction module containing a context-enhanced graph and a threshold-adaptive dif-ferentiable binarization module to obtain the desired edge information.
• We conduct extensive experiments on multiple bench-marks and demonstrate that our method is qualitatively and quantitatively superior to state-of-the-art image forgery localization methods. 2.