Abstract
Planes are generally used in 3D reconstruction for depth sensors, such as RGB-D cameras and LiDARs. This paper focuses on the problem of estimating the optimal planes and sensor poses to minimize the point-to-plane distance. The resulting least-squares problem is referred to as plane ad-justment (PA) in the literature, which is the counterpart of bundle adjustment (BA) in visual reconstruction. Iterative methods are adopted to solve these least-squares problems.
Typically, Newton’s method is rarely used for a large-scale least-squares problem, due to the high computational com-plexity of the Hessian matrix. Instead, methods using an ap-proximation of the Hessian matrix, such as the Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) method, are generally adopted. This pa-per adopts the Newton’s method to efficiently solve the PA problem. Specifically, given poses, the optimal plane have a close-form solution. Thus we can eliminate planes from the cost function, which significantly reduces the number of variables. Furthermore, as the optimal planes are func-tions of poses, this method actually ensures that the optimal planes for the current estimated poses can be obtained at each iteration, which benefits the convergence. The diffi-culty lies in how to efficiently compute the Hessian matrix and the gradient of the resulting cost. This paper provides an efficient solution. Empirical evaluation shows that our algorithm outperforms the state-of-the-art algorithms. 1.

Introduction
Planes ubiquitously exist in man-made environments, as demonstrated in Fig. 1. Thus they are generally used in simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) systems for depth sensors, such as RGB-D cameras [6, 9, 12–14]
Just as bundle adjust-and LiDARs [16, 21, 22, 24, 26]. ment (BA) [3, 8, 20, 25] is important for visual reconstruc-tion [1,5,18,19], jointly optimizing planes and depth sensor poses, which is called plane adjustment (PA) [24,26], is crit-ical for 3D reconstruction using depth sensors. This paper focuses on efficiently solving the large-scale PA problem.
The BA and PA problems both involve jointly optimiz-Figure 1. We use Gaussian noises to perturb the poses of dataset
D in Fig. 3. The standard deviations for rotation and translation are 3◦ and 0.3m, respectively. The resulting point cloud (a) is in a mess. Fig. (b) shows the result from our algorithm. Our algorithm can quickly align the planes, as shown in Fig. 5. ing 3D structures and sensor poses. As the two problems are similar, it is straightforward to apply the well-studied solu-tions for BA to PA, as done in [23, 26]. However, planes in PA can be eliminated, so that the cost function of the PA problem only depends on sensor poses, which significantly reduces the number of variables. This property provides a promising direction to efficiently solve the PA problem.
However, it is difficult to compute the Hessian matrix and the gradient vector of the resulting cost. Although this prob-lem was studied in several previous works [10, 16], no effi-cient solution has been proposed. This paper seeks to solve this problem.
The main contribution of this paper is an efficient PA solution using Newton’s method. We derive a closed-form solution for the Hessian matrix and the gradient vector for the PA problem whose computational complexity is inde-pendent of the number of points on the planes. Our experi-mental results show that the proposed algorithm converges faster than the state-of-the-art algorithms. 2.