Abstract
The goal of click-based interactive image segmentation is to extract target masks with the input of positive/negative clicks. Every time a new click is placed, existing methods run the whole segmentation network to obtain a corrected mask, which is inefficient since several clicks may be needed to reach satisfactory accuracy. To this end, we propose an efficient method to correct the mask with a lightweight mask correction network. The whole network remains a low computational cost from the second click, even if we have a large backbone. However, a simple correction net-work with limited capacity is not likely to achieve com-parable performance with a classic segmentation network.
Thus, we propose a click-guided self-attention module and a click-guided correlation module to effectively exploits the click information to boost performance. First, several tem-plates are selected based on the semantic similarity with click features. Then the self-attention module propagates the template information to other pixels, while the correla-tion module directly uses the templates to obtain target out-lines. With the efficient architecture and two click-guided modules, our method shows preferable performance and ef-ficiency compared to existing methods. The code will be released at https://github.com/feiaxyt/EMC-Click. 1.

Introduction
Interactive image segmentation aims to select the ob-ject of interest with minimal iterative interactions, which can benefit various computer vision tasks, such as semantic segmentation [30], instance segmentation [17], and medi-cal image analysis [28]. As the success of these tasks often requires large-scale mask-level annotations and it is time-consuming to annotate the image manually, interactive seg-mentation is an attractive way to simplify the annotation process and alleviate the annotation cost.
Different interaction strategies have been studied to sim-plify the interactive process, including bounding boxes [23, 37, 48], clicks [33, 40, 47], scribbles [1, 2], boundary
Figure 1. Comparison between the architectures of our method and classic methods. Classic methods run the segmentation network in every iteration, which is inefficient if a large network is adopted.
We update the mask via a lightweight mask correction network, enabling an efficient interaction. points [32], and extreme points [34]. However, due to the complexity of the object boundary and appearance, the per-formance of methods based on bounding boxes may drop if the bounding boxes are not tightly drawn [48]. Besides, it requires more effort to identify the object boundary and place bounding boxes, boundary points, or extreme points on the image. In contrast, the click-based method only re-quires the users to progressively place positive and nega-tive clicks on the foreground and background areas, respec-tively.
It has recently attracted more attention due to its simplicity and well-established training and evaluation pro-tocols [40,47]. Hence, we focus on the click-based method.
In click-based interactive segmentation methods, the model returns a corrected prediction mask after each click from the users. Efficiency is of great importance to in-teractive segmentation methods since a typical segmenta-In re-tion process requires several interactive iterations. cent years, deep learning-based interactive segmentation methods have achieved considerably better performance compared to traditional methods. However, some recent works [20, 22, 39] achieve state-of-the-art performance by employing inference-time optimization to refine the masks, which significantly increases the computational cost. To
eliminate online optimization, RITM [40] investigates dif-ferent designs for interactive segmentation and achieves state-of-the-art results with a classic segmentation network.
To improve efficiency, FocalClick [8] proposes target crop and focus crop strategies to segment two selected local re-gions efficiently. Most click-based methods [7, 8, 27, 31, 40, 47] iteratively run the whole segmentation network to up-date the masks with the input of user clicks, which is time-consuming especially when we have a strong segmentation network. Majumder et al. [32] proposes to refine the mask with a lightweight refinement network. However, the net-work requires the user to place boundary points, which is not user-friendly. Therefore, more efficient click-based in-teractive segmentation methods are still required to reach a better trade-off between performance and efficiency.
With the above consideration, in this work, we develop an efficient click-based interactive segmentation model based on an Efficient Mask Correction network (EMC-Click). The model consists of a base segmentation net-work and a lightweight mask correction network. The base network takes the first click as input and outputs target-aware features and a coarse prediction. The mask correction network iteratively updates the prediction whenever a new click is placed. The difference between our network and the classic network is shown in Fig. 1. This decoupled de-sign ensures that the computational cost of each iteration is relatively low from the second click. However, using a sim-ply designed mask correction network to update the predic-tion can hardly achieve comparable performance with clas-sic methods that use a strong segmentation network. Thus, we propose two feature augmentation modules, including a click-guided self-attention module and a click-guided cor-relation module, to effectively exploit the click information to augment the features in the mask correction network. We first extract the click features and enrich them by select-ing several template features based on the semantic similar-ity between the clicks and other pixels. The self-attention module propagates the information of the template features to other pixels, and the correlation model directly learns target contours. Both modules effectively and efficiently augment the features and improve the segmentation perfor-mance. Experiments on five benchmarks demonstrate that our method achieves competitive performance and higher efficiency compared with state-of-the-art click-based inter-active segmentation methods.
Our contribution can be summarized as follows: prove the segmentation accuracy by effectively ex-ploiting the click information.
• We build EMC-Click on different base segmentation networks and evaluate our models on several bench-marks. The results show that our method achieves preferable performance and efficiency compared to state-of-the-art methods. 2.