Abstract
Open-set action recognition is to reject unknown human action cases which are out of the distribution of the training set. Existing methods mainly focus on learning better un-certainty scores but dismiss the importance of feature rep-resentations. We find that features with richer semantic di-versity can significantly improve the open-set performance under the same uncertainty scores. In this paper, we begin with analyzing the feature representation behavior in the open-set action recognition (OSAR) problem based on the information bottleneck (IB) theory, and propose to enlarge the instance-specific (IS) and class-specific (CS) informa-tion contained in the feature for better performance. To this end, a novel Prototypical Similarity Learning (PSL) frame-work is proposed to keep the instance variance within the same class to retain more IS information. Besides, we no-tice that unknown samples sharing similar appearances to known samples are easily misclassified as known classes.
To alleviate this issue, video shuffling is further introduced in our PSL to learn distinct temporal information between original and shuffled samples, which we find enlarges the
CS information. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed PSL can significantly boost both the open-set and closed-set performance and achieves state-of-the-art results on multiple benchmarks. Code is available at https://github.com/Jun-CEN/PSL. 1.

Introduction
Deep learning methods for video action recognition have developed very fast and achieved remarkable performance in recent years [1–4]. However, these methods operate un-der the closed-set condition, i.e., to classify all videos into
*Work done as an intern at Alibaba DAMO Academy.
Figure 1. (a) Richer semantic features brought by the pretraining can significantly improve the open-set performance. (b) Informa-tion in the feature is divided into IS and CS information. s4 can be identified as OoD since it has distinct IS information (IS bars in different colors) with s1 and s2, while s5 has distinct CS infor-mation (CS bars in different colors) with all InD samples so it may be OoD. Our PSL aims to learn more IS and CS information (bars in longer lengths) than Cross-Entropy (C.E.). (c) Both enlarged IS and CS information boosts the open-set performance. (d) Our PSL achieves the best OSAR performance. one of the classes encountered during training. This closed-set condition is not practical in the real-world scenario, as videos whose classes are beyond the range of the train-ing set will be misclassified as one of the known classes.
Therefore, open-set action recognition (OSAR) is proposed to require the network to correctly classify in-distribution (InD) samples and identify out-of-distribution (OoD) sam-ples. InD and OoD classes refer to classes involved and not involved in the training set, respectively.
Open-set video action recognition is systematically stud-ied in the recent work [5], in which they transfer the existing methods for open-set image recognition into the video do-main [6–9] as the baselines, and propose their own method to introduce deep evidential learning [10] to calculate the uncertainty and propose a contrastive evidential debiasing module to alleviate the appearance bias issue in the video domain. All of these methods tend to improve the OSAR performance by calculating a better uncertainty score, based on the feature representations extracted by the neural net-work (NN). However, the main purpose of training in these methods is still to classify InD samples, which determines the learned feature representations are merely sufficient for
InD classification. We find that almost all methods have a significantly better open-set performance when the NN is pretrained with a large dataset (Fig. 1 (a)), so we argue that the diversity of feature representation is extremely impor-tant for the OSAR task. Therefore, we propose to boost the open-set ability from the feature representation perspective rather than finding a better uncertainty score.
We first analyze the feature representation behavior in the open-set problem based on the information bottleneck (IB) theory [11, 12]. We divide the information of the fea-ture into Instance-Specific (IS) and Class-Specific (CS) in-formation. CS information is used for inter-class recogni-tion, so it is similar for samples within the same class but different for samples from other classes.
IS information is the special information of each sample within the same class, as two samples cannot be exactly the same even if they belong to the same class. Both CS and IS information are crucial for the open-set task, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (b), where s4 and s5 can be identified as OoD samples based on the IS and CS information, respectively. We find that the closed-set classification setting tends to eliminate IS in-formation during training, and cannot fully extract the mini-mum sufficient CS information for the classification task, so we aim to enlarge IS and CS information in learned feature representations for better OSAR performance.
To enlarge the IS information, we propose the Prototypi-cal Similarity Learning (PSL) framework, in which the rep-resentation of an instance is encouraged to have less than 1 similarity with the corresponding prototype. In this way, we encourage the IS information to be retained and not elimi-nated. In addition, [5] finds that OoD videos can be easily classified as InD videos in a similar appearance. To allevi-ate this issue, we introduce the shuffled video into PSL and make it have less than 1 similarity with the original sample.
As the shuffled video almost shares the same appearance in-formation with the original one, we encourage the similarity to be less than 1 so that the network can extract the distinct temporal information among them. We find this technique actually enlarges the CS information in the feature repre-sentation. Fig. 1 (c) shows that enlarging the IS informa-tion is helpful for the open-set performance, and more CS information can further benefit the open-set and closed-set performance. To summarize, our contributions include:
• We provide a novel perspective to analyze the open-set recognition task based on the information bottleneck the-ory, and find that the classical closed-set cross-entropy tends to eliminate the IS information which is helpful to identify OoD samples.
• We propose to enlarge the IS and CS information for bet-ter OSAR performance. Specifically, PSL is designed to retain the IS information in the features, and we involve video shuffling in PSL to learn more CS information.
• Experiments on multiple datasets and backbones show our PSL’s superiority over a large margin compared to other state-of-the-art counterparts, as shown in Fig. 1 (d). 2.