Abstract
State-of-the-art solutions for Shape-from-Polarization (SfP) suffer from a speed-resolution tradeoff: they either sacrifice the number of polarization angles measured or necessitate lengthy acquisition times due to framerate con-straints, thus compromising either accuracy or latency. We tackle this tradeoff using event cameras. Event cameras operate at microseconds resolution with negligible motion blur, and output a continuous stream of events that precisely measures how light changes over time asynchronously. We propose a setup that consists of a linear polarizer rotating at high speeds in front of an event camera. Our method uses the continuous event stream caused by the rotation to reconstruct relative intensities at multiple polarizer an-gles. Experiments demonstrate that our method outper-forms physics-based baselines using frames, reducing the
MAE by 25% in synthetic and real-world datasets. In the real world, we observe, however, that the challenging con-ditions (i.e., when few events are generated) harm the per-formance of physics-based solutions. To overcome this, we propose a learning-based approach that learns to esti-mate surface normals even at low event-rates, improving the physics-based approach by 52% on the real world dataset.
The proposed system achieves an acquisition speed equiva-lent to 50 fps (>twice the framerate of the commercial po-larization sensor) while retaining the spatial resolution of 1MP. Our evaluation is based on the first large-scale dataset for event-based SfP.
Code, dataset and video are available under: https://rpg.ifi.uzh.ch/esfp.html https://youtu.be/sF3Ue2Zkpec 1.

Introduction
Polarization cues have been used in many applications across computer vision, including image dehazing [41], panorama stitching and mosaicing [42], reflection removal
[21], image segmentation [25], optical flow gyroscope, [47] and material classification [5]. Among these, Shape-from-Polarization (SfP) methods exploit changes in polariza-Figure 1. Surface normal estimation using event-based SfP. (a)
Rotating a polarizer in front of an event camera creates sinosoidal changes in intensities, triggering events. (b) The proposed event-based method uses the continuous event stream to reconstruct rel-ative intensities at multiple polarizer angles which is used to es-timate surface normals using physics-based and learning-based method. (c) Our approach outperforms image-based baselines
[24, 51]. tion information to infer geometric properties of an object
[2,18,22,49,51]. It uses variations in radiance under differ-ent polarizer angles to estimate the 3D surface of a given
In particular, when unpolarized light is reflected object. from a surface, it becomes partially polarized depending on the geometry and material of the surface. Surface normals, and thus 3D shape, can then be estimated by orienting a po-larizing filter in front of a camera sensor and studying the relationship between the polarizer angle and the magnitude of light transmission. SfP has a number of advantages over both active and passive depth sensing methods. Unlike ac-(a) Division of fo-cal plane (b) Division of time
Figure 2. Illustration of SfP methods. tive depth sensors that use structured light (SL) [7, 48] or time-of-flight (ToF), SfP is not limited by material type and can be applied to non-Lambertian surfaces like transparent glass and reflective, metallic surfaces.
Despite these advantages, however, estimating high-quality surface normals from polarization images is still an open challenge. Division of Focal Plane (DoFP) meth-ods [22, 32, 33, 51] trade-off spatial resolution for latency and allow for the capture of four polarizations in the same image. This is achieved through a complex manufactur-ing process that requires precisely placing a micro-array of four polarization filters on the image sensor [32, 33], as shown in Fig. 2a Despite the reduced latency, this system constrains the maximum number of polarization angles that can be captured, potentially impacting the accuracy of the estimates as we show in our results.Additionally, the spa-tial resolution of the sensor is also reduced, requiring fur-ther mosaicing-based algorithms for high-resolution recon-struction [50]. On the other hand, Division of Time (DoT) methods [2, 18, 49] provide full-resolution images and are not limited in the number of polarization angles they can capture thanks to a rotating polarizing filter put in front of the image sensor. The frame rate of the sensing camera, however, effectively limits the rate at which the filter can rotate, increasing the acquisition time significantly (acqui-sition time = N/f , where N is the number of polarizer an-gles and f is the framerate of the camera). For this reason, commercial solutions, such as the Lucid Polarisens [33], fa-vor DoFP, despite the lower resolution of both polarization angles and image pixels. To overcome this shortcoming, re-cently, significant progress has been made with data-driven priors [22, 51]. However, these solutions still fall short in terms of computational complexity when compared to DoT methods. A solution able to bridge the accuracy of DoT with the speed of DoFP is thus still lacking in the field.
In this paper, we tackle the speed-resolution trade-off using event cameras. Event cameras are efficient high-speed vision sensors that asynchronously measure changes in brightness intensity with microsecond resolution. We ex-ploit these characteristics to design a DoT approach able to operate at high acquisition speeds (up to 5, 000 fps vs. 22 fps of standard frame-based devices) and full-resolution (1280 × 720) s shown in Fig. 1. Thanks to the working principles of event-cameras, our sensing device provides a continuous stream of information for estimating the sur-Dataset
Polar3D [18]
DeepSfP [51]
SPW [22]
Modality 6 Images(DoT) 4 Images(DoFP) 4 Images(DoFP) (Resolution) Size 3 18 MP 1224 × 1024 236 1224 × 1024 522
ESfP- Synthetic (Ours) Events (DoT) + 12 Images(DoT) 512 × 512
Events (DoT) + 4 Images (DoFP) 1280 × 720
ESfP- Real (Ours) 104 90
Table 1. Summary of publicly available datasets for SfP. face normal as compared to the discrete intensities cap-tured at fixed polarization angles of traditional approaches.
We present two algorithms to estimate surface normals from events, one using geometry and the other based on a learning-based approach. Our geometry-based method takes advantage of the continuous event stream to recon-struct relative intensities at multiple polarizer angles, which are then used to estimate the surface normal using tradi-tional methods. Since events provide a temporally rich in-formation, this results in better reconstruction of intermedi-ate intensities. This leads to an improvement of upto 25% in surface normal estimation, both on the synthetic dataset and on the real-world dataset.On the real dataset, however, the non-idealities of the event camera introduce a lower fill-rate (percentage of pixels triggering events) of 3.6% in average (refer Section 3.1). To overcome this, we propose a deep learning framework which uses a simple U-Net network to predict the dense surface normals from events. Our data-driven approach improves the accuracy over the geometry-based method by 52%. Our contributions can be summa-rized as follows:
• A novel approach for shape-from-polarization using an event camera. Our approach utilizes the rich temporal information of events to reconstruct event intensities at multiple polarization angles. These event intensities are then used to estimate the surface normal. Our method outperforms previous state-of-the-art physics-based ap-proaches using images by 25% in terms of accuracy.
• A learning-based framework which predicts surface nor-mals using events to solve the issue of low fill-rate com-mon in the real-world. This framework improves the es-timation over physics-based approach by 52% in terms of angular error.
• Lastly, we present the first large scale dataset containing over 90 challenging scenes for SfP with events and im-ages. Our dataset consists of events captured by rotating a polarizer in front of an event camera, as well as images captured using the Lucid Polarisens [33]. 2.