Abstract
Instance segmentation seeks to identify and segment each object from images, which often relies on a large num-ber of dense annotations for model training. To allevi-ate this burden, unsupervised instance segmentation meth-ods have been developed to train class-agnostic instance segmentation models without any annotation.
In this pa-per, we propose a novel unsupervised instance segmenta-tion approach, Exemplar-FreeSOLO, to enhance unsuper-vised instance segmentation by exploiting a limited num-ber of unannotated and unsegmented exemplars. The pro-posed framework offers a new perspective on directly per-ceiving top-down information without annotations. Specif-ically, Exemplar-FreeSOLO introduces a novel exemplar-knowledge abstraction module to acquire beneficial top-down guidance knowledge for instances using unsupervised exemplar object extraction. Moreover, a new exemplar em-bedding contrastive module is designed to enhance the dis-criminative capability of the segmentation model by exploit-ing the contrastive exemplar-based guidance knowledge in the embedding space. To evaluate the proposed Exemplar-FreeSOLO, we conduct comprehensive experiments and perform in-depth analyses on three image instance seg-mentation datasets. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed approach is effective and outperforms the state-of-the-art methods. 1.

Introduction
Instance segmentation is among the most fundamental and challenging tasks in computer vision, aiming to recog-nize and segment each object in an image. By utilizing a significant amount of densely annotated data to train seg-mentation models, existing techniques have achieved desir-able results [4, 5, 10, 16, 26, 41, 47]. However, acquiring nu-merous pixel-level labels requires substantial labour and fi-nancial resources, limiting the developments and practical applications in the field. To reduce the costly annotation re-Figure 1. An illustration of the proposed idea. The proposed
Exemplar-FreeSOLO framework addresses the unsupervised in-stance segmentation problem by excavating information from un-labeled data through an exemplar mechanism, which produces top-down knowledge guidance and enhances the discriminability of the segmentation model. quirement, some solutions have been put forth to investigate ways of using less expensive training labels to complete complex tasks, such as weakly-supervised [18, 22, 29, 42], partially-supervised [20, 51] and semi-supervised instance segmentation [3, 52, 55].
Although some significant advances have been achieved, the labelling conundrum obstacle remains as these methods still require nontrivial dense labels and precise position in-formation. By contrast, unsupervised instance segmenta-tion methods benefit from not requiring any annotated data; they can directly exploit many existing unannotated images while being able to continuously upgrade the effectiveness of the segmentation models with incoming data. Therefore it is important to investigate unsupervised instance segmen-tation, which enables learning class-agnostic instance seg-mentation models without any data annotation. Recently, an unsupervised instance segmentation framework, FreeSOLO
[48], has been proposed to extract coarse object masks as pseudo-labels and train an instance segmentation model using a self-supervised method. Although FreeSOLO at-tempts to improve the quality of pseudo labels and predic-tion masks, it can hardly overcome the detrimental effects of the considerable noise in pseudo labels without any guid-ance information in the training process. extracting exemplar objects in an unsupervised way.
The overall fundamental challenges for unsupervised in-stance segmentation lie in the following two aspects: (1)
Unsupervised segmentation models are heavily influenced by the noisy pseudo-labels. When the objects of an image are part of the background relative to the features of interest, models are prone to generating a large number of false pos-itive regions. (2) The unsupervised nature makes it difficult to learn discriminative information. Constructing compar-ison relations directly between different instances for the same type of target tends to lead to fragmentation prob-lems. Meanwhile, as suggested by the generalized context model [36], humans can capture different categories of in-formation through exemplars in their memory. Inspired by this idea, we aim to overcome the unsupervised instance segmentation challenges by developing new segmentation models to integrate an exemplar learning mechanism, which is desirable from both biological and practical perspectives.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach, Exemplar-FreeSOLO, for performing instance segmentation without any annotation. The core of the framework is an exem-plar mechanism that aims to extract and utilize pertinent information from unlabeled data in order to obtain useful knowledge that can guide model training, as shown in Fig-ure 1. Exemplar-FreeSOLO obtains beneficial top-down guidance for objects through exemplar knowledge extrac-tion, while consequently enhancing the discriminability of instance segmentation models by exploiting the exemplar guidance information in a contrastive manner. Specifically, given randomly selected exemplar images, we design an exemplar knowledge abstraction module (EKA) to acquire top-down guidance knowledge for objects. The exemplar images are roughly cropped and fed into an unsupervised model to extract masked-out images for constructing a pool of exemplar objects, which are then used to produce the ex-emplar guidance knowledge. Next, an exemplar embedding contrastive module (EEC) is devised to capture homoge-neous components of the same type of instances through a contrastive learning paradigm. This is achieved by con-sidering similarities between the embeddings of unlabeled images and the exemplar embeddings and constructing con-trastive relationships among them. This module is expected to enhance the discriminability of the instance segmenta-tion model. Finally, we incorporate the two modules into the FreeSOLO framework to effectively train instance seg-mentation models. The main contributions of our paper are summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel Exemplar-FreeSOLO approach to tackle the unsupervised instance segmentation prob-lem by leveraging useful information from the unla-belled data through an exemplar mechanism.
• We design an exemplar knowledge abstraction module to acquire beneficial top-down guidance knowledge by
• We devise an exemplar embedding contrastive mod-ule to enhance the discriminative capability of instance segmentation models by exploiting contrasting exem-plar guidance knowledge in the embedding space.
• Experimental results on three datasets show that the proposed Exemplar-FreeSOLO can substantially out-perform the state-of-the-art unsupervised instance seg-mentation and object detection methods. 2.