Abstract
Automated shape repair approaches currently lack ac-cess to datasets that describe real-world damaged geome-try. We present Fantastic Breaks (and Where to Find Them: https://terascale-all-sensing-research-studio.github.io/FantasticBreaks), a dataset containing scanned, waterproofed, and cleaned 3D meshes for 150 broken objects, paired and geometrically aligned with complete counterparts. Fantastic Breaks contains class and material labels, proxy repair parts that join to broken meshes to generate complete meshes, and manually anno-tated fracture boundaries. Through a detailed analysis of fracture geometry, we reveal differences between Fantastic
Breaks and synthetic fracture datasets generated using ge-ometric and physics-based methods. We show experimental shape repair evaluation with Fantastic Breaks using mul-tiple learning-based approaches pre-trained with synthetic datasets and re-trained with subset of Fantastic Breaks. 1.

Introduction
Damage to objects is an expected occurrence of every-day real-world usage. However, when damage occurs, ob-jects that could be repaired are often thrown out. Addi-tive manufacturing techniques are rapidly becoming acces-sible at the consumer level, with 3D printing technologies available for materials such as plastics, metals, and even ceramics and wood. Though current approaches for re-pair have been largely manual and restricted to niche ar-eas such as cultural heritage restoration, a large body of recent research has emerged on the automated reversal of damage, including reassembly of fractured parts using 3D scans [4, 9, 17, 19, 21–23, 38, 39, 51, 53, 54], or generation of new repair parts when portions of the original object are ir-retrievably lost due to damage [18, 20, 28–30, 32, 35, 40, 47, 48]. Geometry-driven approaches based on shape match-ing [4,17,18,21–23,27,32,35,38–40,47,48] that are not us-able for objects of unknown complete geometry have given
Figure 1. We present Fantastic Breaks, a dataset of 3D scans of real-world broken objects (top) aligned to 3D scans of complete counterparts (bottom). Objects span classes such as mugs, plates, statues, jars, and bowls—household items prone to damage. way to learning-driven approaches [9, 19, 20, 28–30, 51, 53] aimed at generalization to repair at a large scale.
However, a principal challenge limiting understanding of real-world damage and limiting application-focused evalua-tion of repair approaches is that datasets of real-world dam-age for consumer space objects are virtually non-existent.
Current learning-driven approaches for repair use datasets where fracture-based damage is synthetically generated us-ing geometric approaches such as Boolean operations with primitives [9, 18, 28–31]. As they make assumptions about the fracture process rather than using data-driven fracture generation, the practical usability of such geometric meth-ods for repairing real fractures is unknown. With Breaking
Bad, Sell´an et al. [44] have taken a first step toward large-scale fracture dataset generation. Breaking Bad consists of 3D shapes from Thingi10k [55] and PartNet [37] subjected to physics-based damage using fracture modes [45]. By re-moving macro-scale shape assumptions embodied by geo-metric primitives, Breaking Bad is a promising step for re-search in shape assembly and repair. However, fractures in
Breaking Bad suffer from typical issues of resolution and simulation time step size that underlie physics simulations.
The dataset is thus unfortunately hindered in providing a faithful representation of real-world damage.
In this work, we contribute Fantastic Breaks, the first dataset of 3D scans of damaged objects paired with 3D scans of their complete non-damaged counterparts, as shown in Figure 1. Each damaged object—hereafter re-ferred to a broken object due to the nature of damage suf-fered—is 3D scanned and geometrically registered to a scan of the undamaged complete object, such that intact regions of the complete and broken scans are aligned. At the time of publication, the dataset contains 150 broken/complete pairs.
Our damage infliction often leaves one broken part in-tact, destroying or over-fragmenting the remainder of the object. We use an off-the-shelf subtraction-based ap-proach [27] to generate repair part proxies from the intact broken part aligned to its complete counterpart. We also provide manually annotated class labels, material labels, and annotated fractured regions on the broken meshes. Our work emulates endeavors of groups in vision and robotics that contribute datasets of 3D scanned everyday-use ob-jects [5, 6, 13, 25, 46]. Our analysis of real-world fracture properties in Fantastic Breaks reveals fine-scale fracture structure that enables our dataset to overcome the draw-backs of synthetic datasets. We use our dataset to evaluate existing shape repair approaches on real fractured objects.
We summarize our contributions as follows: 1. We contribute the first 3D scanned real-world dataset of geometrically aligned broken/complete object pairs to enable application-focused evaluation of repair. 2. We provide class, material, and fracture surface anno-tations, and ground truth repair part proxies. 3. We contribute a geometric analysis of Fantastic Breaks in comparison to existing synthetic fracture datasets. 4. We provide evaluations of existing shape repair ap-proaches using Fantastic Breaks. 2.