Abstract
The non-line-of-sight imaging technique aims to recon-struct targets from multiply reﬂected light. For most exist-ing methods, dense points on the relay surface are raster scanned to obtain high-quality reconstructions, which re-quires a long acquisition time. In this work, we propose a signal-surface collaborative regularization (SSCR) frame-work that provides noise-robust reconstructions with a min-imal number of measurements. Using Bayesian inference, we design joint regularizations of the estimated signal, the 3D voxel-based representation of the objects, and the 2D surface-based description of the targets. To our best knowl-edge, this is the ﬁrst work that combines regularizations in mixed dimensions for hidden targets. Experiments on syn-thetic and experimental datasets illustrated the efﬁciency of the proposed method under both confocal and non-confocal settings. We report the reconstruction of the hidden targets with complex geometric structures with only 5 × 5 confocal measurements from public datasets, indicating an acceler-ation of the conventional measurement process by a factor of 10,000. Besides, the proposed method enjoys low time and memory complexity with sparse measurements. Our approach has great potential in real-time non-line-of-sight imaging applications such as rescue operations and au-tonomous driving. 1.

Introduction
The non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging technique en-ables reconstructions of targets out of the direct line of sight, which is attractive in various applications such as au-tonomous driving, remote sensing, rescue operations and medical imaging [1,5,6,10,15,16,19,21,26,33–35,38–40].
A typical scenario of NLOS imaging is shown in Figure 1.
Several points on the visible surface are illuminated by a laser and the back-scattered light from the target is de-tected to reconstruct the target. The NLOS detection sys-tem is confocal if each illumination point is the same with
Figure 1. A typical non-line-of-sight imaging scenario. a) The time resolved signals are measured at only 3 × 3 focal points. b)
The three views of the reconstructed target obtained with the pro-posed SSCR method. the detection point, and non-confocal otherwise. The time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) technique is ap-plied in the detection process due to the extremely low pho-ton intensity after multiple diffuse reﬂections. In practice, a single-photon avalanche diode (SPAD) in the Geiger-mode can be used to record the photon events with time-of-ﬂight (TOF) information [3]. The ﬁrst experimental demonstra-tion of NLOS imaging dates back to 2012, where the targets are reconstructed with the back-projection (BP) method
[37]. Extensions of this approach include its fast implemen-tation [2], the ﬁltering technique for reconstruction quality enhancement [17], and weighting factors for noise reduc-tion [11].
A number of efﬁcient methods have been designed
for fast reconstructions. The light cone transform (LCT) method [30] formulates the physical model as a convolu-tion operator, so that the reconstructions can be obtained us-ing the Wiener deconvolution method with the fast Fourier transform. The directional light cone transform (D-LCT)
[42] generalizes the LCT and reconstructs the albedo and surface normal simultaneously. The method of frequency wavenumber migration (F-K) [20] formulates the propaga-tion of light using the wave equation, and also provides a fast inversion algorithm with the frequency-domain interpo-lation technique. Whereas the LCT, D-LCT and F-K meth-ods only work directly in confocal measurement scenarios, the phasor ﬁeld (PF) method [23,24,32] converts the NLOS imaging scenarios to LOS cases and works for the gen-eral non-confocal setting with low computation complex-ity. For high-quality and noise-robust reconstructions, the signal-object collaborative regularization (SOCR) method can be applied, but brings additional computational cost. In recent years, deep learning-based methods are also intro-duced to the ﬁeld of NLOS imaging [7, 8, 27, 43]. Besides, advances in hardware enhance the distance of NLOS detec-tion to kilometers [39], or make it possible to reconstruct targets on the scale of millimeters [38].
Despite these breakthroughs, the trade off between the acquisition time and the imaging quality is inevitable. In the raster scanning mode, the acquisition time is propor-tional to the number of measurement points with ﬁxed scan-ning speed. Due to the intrinsic ill-posedness of the NLOS reconstruction problem [22] and heavy measurement noise
[11], dense measurements are necessary for high quality re-constructions [20, 23, 30]. The measurement process may take from seconds to hours, which poses a great challenge for applications such as autonomous driving, where real-time reconstruction of the video stream is needed. The ac-quisition process can be accelerated by reducing the number of pulses used for each illumination point. In the work [18], the pulse number that record the ﬁrst returning photon is used to reconstruct the target. Another way to reduce the ac-quisition time is to design array detectors for non-confocal measurements. For example, the implementation of the phasor ﬁeld method with SPAD arrays realizes low-latency real-time video imaging of the hidden scenes [28]. A third way to accelerate the NLOS detection process is to reduce the number of measurement points. It is shown that 16 × 16 confocal measurements are enough to reconstruct the hid-den target by incorporating the compressed sensing tech-nique [41].
In this paper, we study the randomness in the photon de-tection process of NLOS scenarios and propose an imag-ing method that deals with a very limited number of spatial measurements, which we term the few-shot NLOS detec-tion scenarios. We design joint regularizations of the esti-mated signal, the 3D voxel-based representation of the ob-Figure 2. The least-squares solution of the statue with 3 × 3 con-focal measurements [20]. The target cannot be identiﬁed even though its simulated signal matches the measurements well (see
Fig. 3). Strong regularizations are needed to reconstruct the target.
See also Fig. 6 for a comparison.
Figure 3. Comparisons of the measured data and the simulated data of the least-squares solution for the instance of the statue [20].
The measured signals are shown in black. The simulated data of the least-squares solution are shown in red. The shapes of the signals are very close to each other. jects, and the 2D surface-based description of the targets, which leads to faithful reconstruction results. The main contributions of this work are as follows.
• We propose a signal-surface collaborative regulariza-tion (SSCR) framework for few-shot non-line-of-sight reconstructions, which works under both confocal and non-confocal settings.
• We report the reconstruction of the hidden targets with complex geometric structures with only 5 × 5 confo-cal measurements from public datasets, indicating an acceleration of the conventional measurement process by a factor of 10,000.
2.