Abstract
Cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) is a technique for reconstructing the 3-dimensional (3D) structure of biomolecules (especially large protein complexes and molecular assemblies). As the resolution increases to the near-atomic scale, building protein structures de novo from cryo-EM maps becomes possible. Recently, recognition-based de novo building methods have shown the potential to streamline this process. However, it cannot build a complete structure due to the low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) prob-lem. At the same time, AlphaFold has led to a great break-through in predicting protein structures. This has inspired us to combine fragment recognition and structure predic-tion methods to build a complete structure. In this paper, we propose a new method named FFF that bridges protein structure prediction and protein structure recognition with flexible fitting. First, a multi-level recognition network is used to capture various structural features from the input 3D cryo-EM map. Next, protein structural fragments are generated using pseudo peptide vectors and a protein se-quence alignment method based on these extracted features.
Finally, a complete structural model is constructed using the predicted protein fragments via flexible fitting. Based on our benchmark tests, FFF outperforms the baseline meth-ods for building complete protein structures. 1.

Introduction
With the advances in hardware and image processing al-gorithms, cryo-EM has become a major experimental tech-nique for determining the structures of biological macro-molecules, especially proteins. Cryo-EM data process-ing consists of two major steps: 3D reconstruction and structure building. In the 3D reconstruction step, a set of 2-dimensional (2D) micrographs (projection images) are collected using transmission electron microscopy for bio-logical samples embedded in a thin layer of amorphous
*Corresponding author ice. Each micrograph contains many 2D projections of the molecules in unknown orientations. Software tools such as
RELION [17], cryoSPARC [12] and cryoDRGN [28] can be used to recover the underlying 3D molecular density map.
In the second step, we build the atomic structure of the underlying protein by trying to determine the positions of all the atoms using the 3D density map from the 3D re-construction step. This is done through an iterative process that contains the following steps: (1) rigid-body docking of an initial staring structure into the cryo-EM map; (2) man-ual or automated/semi-automated flexible refinement of the docked structure to match the map [15,24,25]. The manual process is extremely time consuming and requires extensive expert-level domain knowledge. Existing automated/semi-automated flexible fitting may mismatch the initial structure and density map regions.
Figure 1. A protein backbone along the chain with increasing residue index from left to right. Arrow marks the peptide bond linking two consecutive amino acids from C atom of one amino acid and N atom of another.
In the past decades, the resolution of cryo-EM has been drastically improved from medium-resolution (5–10 ˚A) to near-atomic resolution (1.2–5 ˚A) [20]. At the same time, deep learning-based de novo protein structure building methods have shown great progress. As a result, building a reasonable atomic structural model de novo is already feasi-ble for maps whose resolutions are better than 3 ˚A. Even so, due to the flexible nature of some local structures, de novo modeling methods often cannot model a complete protein
structure and still require significant manual effort and do-main expertise.
With the advent of AlphaFold [8], high-accuracy struc-ture predictions have greatly helped biologists in struc-ture modeling from cryo-EM maps. AlphaFold can pre-dict single-chain structures that closely match the cryo-EM density maps in many cases [1]. However, its ability is still limited to predicting structures for multimeric protein complexes, a protein with alternative conformations, and protein-ligand complexes. Cryo-EM studies are required in solving structures in these complex scenarios.
One possible solution is to effectively combine exper-imental information and machine learning-based predic-tion. In this work, we propose a new method called FFF (“Fragment-guided Flexible Fitting”) that enables more re-liable and complete cryo-EM structure building by bridging protein structure prediction and protein structure recogni-tion with flexible fitting. First, we use a multi-level recog-nition network to capture different-level structural features from the input 3D volume (i.e. cryo-EM map). Next, the extracted features are used for fragment recognition to con-struct the recognized structure. Finally, we run a flexible fitting to building a complete structure based on the recog-nized structure.
Our main contributions are as follows:
• We propose a more straightforward method for protein backbone tracing using pseudo peptide vectors.
• We propose a more sensitive and accurate protein se-quence alignment algorithm to identify the amino acid types and residue index of detected residues. This is essential for aligning the recognized fragments and the machine-learning predicted structure.
• We combine deep-learning-based 3D map recogni-tion with molecular dynamics that surpasses previ-ous methods in cryo-EM structure building using Al-phaFold. 2.