Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) essentially pursues class boundary exploration with less dependence on human an-notations. Although typical attempts focus on ameliorat-ing the inevitable error-prone pseudo-labeling, we think differently and resort to exhausting informative semantics from multiple probably correct candidate labels. In this pa-per, we introduce Fuzzy Positive Learning (FPL) for accu-rate SSL semantic segmentation in a plug-and-play fash-ion, targeting adaptively encouraging fuzzy positive pre-dictions and suppressing highly-probable negatives. Be-ing conceptually simple yet practically effective, FPL can remarkably alleviate interference from wrong pseudo la-bels and progressively achieve clear pixel-level semantic discrimination. Concretely, our FPL approach consists of two main components, including fuzzy positive assign-ment (FPA) to provide an adaptive number of labels for each pixel and fuzzy positive regularization (FPR) to re-strict the predictions of fuzzy positive categories to be larger than the rest under different perturbations. Theo-retical analysis and extensive experiments on Cityscapes and VOC 2012 with consistent performance gain justify the superiority of our approach. Codes are provided in https://github.com/qpc1611094/FPL. 1.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation models enable accurate scene understanding [1, 29, 45] with the help of fine pixel-level annotations. Yet, collecting labeled segmentation datasets is time-consuming and labor-costing [6]. Considering unla-beled data are annotation-free and easily accessible, semi-*Equal contribution.
†Corresponding author. supervised learning (SSL) is introduced into semantic seg-mentation [5, 34, 43, 49, 51, 53] to encourage the model to generalize better on unseen data with less dependence on artificial annotations.
Figure 1. (a) Existing methods using pseudo label to utilize un-labeled data. (b) The proposed FPL that provides multiple fuzzy positive labels for each pixel to utilize unlabeled data. The exam-ple of ‘Truck’ shows that our method covers ground truth (GT) more comprehensively than vanilla positive learning.
The semi-supervised segmentation task faces a scenario where only a subset of training images are assigned seg-mentation labels while the others remain unlabeled. Cur-rent state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods utilize unlabeled data via consistency regularization, which aims to obtain invari-ant predictions for unlabeled pixels under various perturba-tions [5, 34, 49, 53]. Their general paradigm is to use the pseudo label generated under weak (or none) perturbations as the learning target of predictions under strong perturba-tions. Though achieving promising results, errors are in-evitable in the pseudo label used in these methods, misguid-ing the training of their models [24, 33]. An intuitive exam-ple is that some pixels may be confused in categories with similar semantics. As Fig. 1 (a), some pixels belonging to
‘Truck’ are wrongly classified into the ‘Car’ category (e.g., white boxed pixel). To mitigate this problem, typical meth-ods focus on ameliorating the learning of pseudo labels by filtering low-confidence pseudo labels out [14,21,38,51,53] and generating pseudo labels more accurately [8,20,26,48].
However, the semantics of ground truth buried in other un-selected labels are ignored in existing methods.
In this paper, we propose Fuzzy Positive Learning (FPL), a new SSL segmentation method that exhausts in-formative semantics from multiple probably correct candi-date labels. We name these labels “fuzzy positive” labels since each of them has the probability to be the ground truth. As shown in Fig. 1 (b), our fuzzy positive labels cover the ground truth more comprehensively, facilitating our FPL to exploit the semantics of ground truth better. Ex-tending learning from one pseudo label to learning from multiple fuzzy positive labels is not a simple implemen-tation, which contains two pending issues. One is how to provide an adaptive number of labels for each pixel. And the other one is how to exploit the possible GT semantics from fuzzy positive labels. For these two issues, a fuzzy positive assignment (FPA) algorithm is first proposed to se-lect which labels should be appended to the fuzzy positive label set of each pixel. Afterward, a fuzzy positive regular-ization (FPR) is developed to regularize the predictions of fuzzy positive categories to be larger than the predictions of the rest negative categories under different perturbations.
Our FPL achieves consistent performance gain on
Cityscapes and Pascal VOC 2012 datasets using CPS [5] and AEL [14] as baselines. Moreover, we theoretically and empirically analyze that the superiority of FPL lies in re-vising the gradient of learning ground truth when pseudo-labels are wrongly-assigned. Our main contributions are:
• FPL provides a new perspective for SSL segmentation, that is, learning informative semantics from multiple fuzzy positive labels instead of only one pseudo label.
• A fuzzy positive assignment is proposed to provide an adaptive number of labels for each pixel. Besides, a fuzzy positive regularization is developed to learn the semantics of ground truth from fuzzy positive labels.
• FPL is easy to implement and could bring stable per-formance gains on existing SSL segmentation methods in a plug-and-play fashion. entropy minimization and consistency regularization. En-tropy minimization enforces the predicted probability dis-tribution to be sharp by training upon pseudo labels [2, 3, 23, 27, 38, 46]. On the other hand, consistency regular-ization aims to obtain prediction invariance under various perturbations, including input perturbation [31, 38, 46], fea-ture perturbation [34], network perturbation [10, 18, 35, 40], etc. Variants of their combination have achieved great suc-cess [35,38,44,47,50], whose core inspiration is computing consistency regularization via pseudo labeling. 2.2. Semi-supervised Semantic Segmentation
Semi-supervised semantic segmentation methods bene-fit from the development of general semi-supervised learn-ing, which could be also roughly divided into two types of approaches: consistency regularization based meth-ods [11, 17, 19, 34] and entropy-minimization based meth-ods [4, 9, 16, 28, 30, 52]. More recently, SOTA semi-supervised segmentation methods combine both two tech-nologies together to train their models. PseudoSeg [53],
AEL [14], UCC [8] and Jianglong Yuan et al. [49] propose to use the pseudo label generated from weak augmented im-age to supervise the prediction of strong augmented image.
CPS [5] designs a mutual learning mechanism that trains two student models with pseudo labels from each other.
PC2Seg [51] proposes a negative sampling technique to pro-vide reliable negative samples for SSL segmentation. Dif-ferent from existing methods, we propose for the first time to exploit the informative semantics of unlabeled data from multiple fuzzy positive labels, resulting in less interference from wrong pseudo labels and accurate segmentation.
Pseudo-label learning is the key technology in current
SSL segmentation methods, but it has a limitation in that wrong pseudo labels mislead the training of SSL mod-els. Typical approaches design filter-out mechanisms to use only high-confidence pseudo-labels for training [8, 14, 21, 51,53] and develop complex training mechanisms to predict accurate pseudo-labels [8, 20, 26, 48]. Apart from the above methods, U2PL [43] introduces the idea of negative learning into SSL segmentation, which has similarities to our FPL. It thinks uncertain pixels usually get confused among only a few classes. Hence, it uses uncertain pixels as negative sam-ples for those unlikely classes. We analyze that our FPL and negative learning have mathematically different optimiza-tion objectives. That is, negative learning implicitly max-imizes only the prediction of the pseudo-label, while our
FPL learns all fuzzy positive labels. (cf. Appendix). 2.