Abstract
We present G-MSM (Graph-based Multi-Shape
Matching), a novel unsupervised learning approach for non-rigid shape correspondence. Rather than treating a collection of input poses as an unordered set of samples, we explicitly model the underlying shape data manifold.
To this end, we propose an adaptive multi-shape matching architecture that constructs an affinity graph on a given set of training shapes in a self-supervised manner. The key idea is to combine putative, pairwise correspondences by propagating maps along shortest paths in the underlying shape graph. During training, we enforce cycle-consistency between such optimal paths and the pairwise matches which enables our model to learn topology-aware shape priors.
We explore different classes of shape graphs and recover specific settings, like template-based matching (star graph) or learnable ranking/sorting (TSP graph), as special cases in our framework. Finally, we demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on several recent shape correspondence benchmarks, including real-world 3D scan meshes with topological noise and challenging inter-class pairs.1 1.

Introduction
Shape matching of non-rigid object categories is a central problem in 3D computer vision and graphics that has been studied extensively over the last few years. Especially in recent times, there is a growing demand for such algorithms as 3D reconstruction techniques and affordable scanning devices become increasingly powerful and broadly avail-able. Classical shape correspondence approaches devise axiomatic algorithms that make specific assumptions about the resulting maps, such as near-isometry, area preservation, approximate rigidity, bounded distortion, or commutativity with the intrinsic Laplacian. In contrast, real-world scan meshes are often subject to various types of noise, including
† Currently at NVIDIA 1Our implementation is available under the following link: https:
//github.com/marvin-eisenberger/gmsm-matching (i) Shape graph G (ii) Affinity edge weights
Source
Π(1,2)
Π(1,3) ◦ Π(3,2) (iii) Putative correspondences Π(1,2) vs multi-matching Π(1,3) ◦ Π(3,2)
Figure 1. For a given collection of 3D meshes {X (i)∣1 ≤ i ≤ N }, (i) our method constructs, in a fully unsupervised manner, a shape graph G which approximates the underlying shape data manifold. (ii) Its edge weights (affinity scores) are derived from a putative (iii) During training, we pairwise correspondence loss signal. enforce cycle-consistency by propagating maps along shortest paths in the graph G. As shown for the sample pair above (X (1), X (2)), the resulting multi-matching Π(1,3) ◦ Π(3,2) is significantly more accurate than the pairwise map Π(1,2). topological changes [16, 33], partial views [2], general non-isometric deformations [17, 65], objects in clutter [12], and varying data representations [57]. In this work, we address several of the aforementioned challenges and demonstrate that our proposed method achieves improved stability for a number of 3D scan mesh datasets.
The majority of existing deep learning methods for shape matching [2, 15, 20, 21, 24, 39, 51, 56] treat a given set of meshes as an unstructured collection of poses. During train-ing, random pairs of shapes are sampled for which a neural network is queried and a pairwise matching loss is mini-mized. While this approach is straightforward, it often fails to recognize commonalities and context-dependent patterns
which only emerge from analyzing the shape collection as a whole. Not all samples of a shape collection are created equal. In most cases, some pairs of poses are much closer than others. Maps between similar geometries are inherently correlated and convey relevant clues to one another. This is particularly relevant for challenging real-world scenar-ios, where such redundancies can help disambiguate noisy geometries, non-isometric deformations, and topological changes. The most common approach of existing multi-matching methods is to learn a canonical embedding per pose, either in the spatial [10] or Laplace-Beltrami frequency domain [26,28]. This incentivizes the resulting matches to be consistent under concatenation. However, such approaches are in practice still trained in a fully pairwise manner for ease of training. Furthermore, relying on canonical embed-dings can lead to limited generalization for unseen test poses.
Concrete approaches often assume a specific mesh resolu-tion and nearly-isometric poses [10], or require an additional fine-tuning optimization at test time [26, Sec. 5].
Rather than interpreting a given training set as a random, unstructured collection of shapes, our approach explicitly models the underlying shape manifold. To this end, we de-fine an affinity graph G on the set of input shapes whose edge weights (i.e. affinity scores) are informed by the outputs of a pairwise matching module. We then devise a novel adaptive multi-matching architecture that propagates matches along shortest paths in the underlying shape graph G. The resulting maps are topology-aware, i.e., informed by geometries from the whole shape collection. An example is shown in Fig-ure 1, where the multi-matching Π(1,3) ◦ Π(3,2) obtained by our approach is significantly more accurate than the naive, pairwise map Π(1,2). During training, we promote cycle-consistency of shortest paths in the shape graph. In summary, our contributions are as follows: 1. Introduce the notion of an edge-weighted, undirected shape graph G to approximate the underlying data man-ifold for an unordered collection of 3D meshes. 2. Propose a novel, adaptive multi-shape matching ap-proach that enforces cycle-consistency for optimal paths in the shape graph G in a self-supervised manner. 3. Demonstrate state-of-the-art performance for a range of challenging non-rigid matching tasks, including non-isometric matching due to topological noise [16, 33] and inter-class pairs [17, 65]. 2.