Abstract
When deploying the Unmanned Aerial Vehicles object detection (UAV-OD) network to complex and unseen real-world scenarios, the generalization ability is usually re-duced due to the domain shift. To address this issue, this paper proposes a novel frequency domain disentanglement method to improve the UAV-OD generalization. Specifi-cally, we first verified that the spectrum of different bands in the image has different effects to the UAV-OD general-ization. Based on this conclusion, we design two learnable filters to extract domain-invariant spectrum and domain-specific spectrum, respectively. The former can be used to train the UAV-OD network and improve its capacity for generalization. In addition, we design a new instance-level contrastive loss to guide the network training. This loss enables the network to concentrate on extracting domain-invariant spectrum and domain-specific spectrum, so as to achieve better disentangling results. Experimental re-sults on three unseen target domains demonstrate that our method has better generalization ability than both the base-line method and state-of-the-art methods. 1.

Introduction
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) equipped with cam-eras have been exploited in a wide variety of applications, opening up a new frontier for computer vision applications
[7, 11, 22, 28]. As one of the fundamental functions for the
UAV-based applications, UAV object detection (UAV-OD) has garnered considerable interest [23, 31, 38]. However, the large mobility of UAV-mounted cameras leads to an un-predictable operating environment. The domain shift that occurs when applying a UAV-OD network that has been trained on a given dataset (i.e., source domain) to unseen real-world data (i.e., target domain) typically results in in-∗Corresponding author. This work was supported by the National
Key R&D Program of China under Grant 2020AAA0105702, the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grants 62225207, 62276243 and U19B2038, the University Synergy Innovation Program of
Anhui Province under Grant GXXT-2019-025.
Figure 1. Detection results on unseen target domains. UAV-OD network is trained on daylight images and tested on images with various scene structures (1st row), diverse illumination conditions (2nd row), and adverse weather conditions (3rd row). Green rect-angular boxes denote new correct detections beyond the baseline. adequate performance. In particular, unseen real-world data consists of unexpected and unknown samples, such as im-ages taken in various scene structures, diverse illumination conditions, and adverse weather conditions. Therefore, it is crucial to improve the generalization ability of UAV-OD.
To alleviate the domain shift impact, existing methods broadly come in two flavors: Domain Adaptation (DA)
[3, 5, 8, 16, 17, 26, 37] and Domain Generalization (DG)
[19,20,27,30,40]. In general, DA aims to tackle the domain shift problem by learning domain-invariant/aligned features between the source and target domains. However, DA meth-ods cannot be readily employed when it is hard to guarantee the accessibility of the target data. The requirement to ac-cess both source and target data restricts the applicability of
DA approaches.
Recently, considerable attention has been drawn to the field of DG. The goal of DG is to learn a model using data from a single or multiple related but distinct source domains so that the model can generalize well under distri-Reject band
Various Scene
AP50 AP75
AP
Diverse Illumination
AP
AP50 AP75
Adverse Weather
AP50 AP75
AP
Average
AP50 AP75
Null (full band)
α = 0, β = 0.01
α = 0.01, β = 0.1
α = 0.1, β = 1 66.0 60.0 61.4 70.2 37.6 30.2 30.3 35.1 36.7 32.6 32.8 37.1 11.1 6.4 39.1 29.4 3.4 1.9 15.9 10.2 4.8 2.75 19.8 13.6 42.3 39.5 42.6 38.2 14.9 16.1 18.6 10.6 19.6 19.0 20.8 16.7 39.8 35.3 47.7 45.9 18.6 16.1 21.6 18.6
AP 20.4 18.1 24.5 22.5
Table 1. We conduct preliminary experiments to explore whether different spectral bands contribute equally to the UAV-OD network’s generalization ability. The specified bands of source domain images are filtered out for training according to the reject band. For testing, the generalization performance of the UAV-OD network is evaluated on three unseen target domains. We adopt the evaluation protocols
AP50, AP75, and AP. ”Average” refers to the average generalization performance across three unseen target domains. We can conclude that eliminating various bands has distinct effects on the generalization of unseen target domains for UAV-OD network. bution shifts [43]. Most existing DG methods [19, 30, 40] focus on decoupling object-related features from global features via spatial vanilla convolution. However, unlike generic object detection scenarios based on surveillance or other ground-based cameras, the rapid movement of UAV-mounted cameras leads to severe changes in the global ap-pearance. For UAV-OD scenarios where the global appear-ance changes, it is essential to explore global dependency for better disentanglement. The spatial vanilla convolution, which only emphasizes local pixel attention, cannot fully explore global dependency, leading to suboptimal disentan-glement and generalization results.
Inspired by the spectral theorem that the frequency do-main obeys the nature of global modeling, we propose to improve the UAV-OD generalization ability via frequency domain disentanglement. We first conduct preliminary ex-periments, i.e., exploring whether all spectrum bands con-tribute equally to the generalization for the UAV-OD task, to gain insight into how to implement our idea. If not, we can extract the spectrum that is conducive to generalization and use it to train the UAV-OD network to enhance its general-ization. Specifically, we first convert each source domain image x ∈ RH×W ×C into frequency space through Fast
Fourier Transform (FFT) [24]:
F(x)(u, v) =
H−1 (cid:88)
W −1 (cid:88) h=0 w=0 x(h, w)e−j2π( h
H u+ w
W v). (1)
The frequency space signal F(x) can be further decom-posed to an amplitude spectrum A(x) and a phase spectrum
P(x), which is expressed as:
A(x)(u, v) = (cid:2)R2(x)(u, v) + I 2(x)(u, v)(cid:3)1/2
,
P(x)(u, v) = arctan (cid:20) I(x)(u, v)
R(x)(u, v) (cid:21)
, (2) where R(x) and I(x) represent the real and imaginary part of F(x). For each source image, we filter out the bands of the amplitude spectrum A(x) between a certain upper threshold α and lower threshold β (’Reject band’ in Tab. 1) with a band reject filter fs ∈ RH×W ×C and obtain the re-maining amplitude spectrum ˆA(x): fs(i, j) =

 1,
 0, 2 , βH 2 , βW i ∈ [ αH j ∈ [ αW otherwise 2 ] ∪ [ (1−α)H 2 ] ∪ [ (1−α)W
, (1−β)H
] 2
, (1−β)W 2 2 2
] (3)
A(x) = ˆA(x) ⊗ fs, (4) where ⊗ denotes element-wise multiplication. ˆA(x) is then fed to Inverse Fast Fourier Transform (IFFT) with P(x) to generate the remaining image ˆx which is utilized to train the
UAV-OD network. After training, we apply the UAV-OD network to three unseen target domains to evaluate the gen-eralization ability. The experimental results are presented in Tab. 1. We can observe that removing different bands has varying effects on generalization to three unseen target domains. Therefore, we can conclude that different bands contribute differently to the UAV-OD generalization.
Based on the above observation, we employ two learn-able filters to identify and extract the domain-invariant and domain-specific spectrums. The former contributes posi-tively to generalization, while the latter is the opposite. Fur-thermore, we design a new instance-level contrastive loss to aid in learning the learnable filters, enabling them to concentrate on disentangling the two different spectrums.
By optimizing the instance-level contrastive loss, the in-stance features of those are encouraged to contain domain-invariant characteristics shared by target objects, and the domain-specific characteristics shared in the source do-main, respectively. In this way, the UAV-OD network can generalize well on unseen target domains. For experiment settings, we focus on learning a single-domain generalized
UAV-OD network, which is more challenging [30]. We fur-ther validate the network on three unseen target domains, in-cluding various scene structures, diverse illumination con-ditions, and adverse weather conditions, demonstrating su-perior generalization ability, as shown in Fig. 1.
Our main contributions are highlighted as follows:
• We provide a new perspective to improve the general-ization ability of the UAV-OD network on unseen tar-get domains. To our best knowledge, this is the first attempt to learn generalized UAV-OD via frequency domain disentanglement.
• Based on the frequency domain disentanglement, we propose a new framework that utilizes two learnable filters to extract the domain-invariant and domain-specific spectrum and design an instance-level con-trastive loss to guide the disentangling process.
• Extensive experiments on three unseen target domains reveal that our method enables the UAV-OD network to achieve superior generalization performance in com-parison to the baseline and state-of-the-art methods. 2.