Abstract
Training on Base Classes {ceiling,  floor,  wall,  table}
Input Base Point Cloud
Base Model
Labels
Despite the signiﬁcant recent progress made on 3D point cloud semantic segmentation, the current methods re-quire training data for all classes at once, and are not suit-able for real-life scenarios where new categories are be-ing continuously discovered. Substantial memory storage and expensive re-training is required to update the model to sequentially arriving data for new concepts.
In this paper, to continually learn new categories using previous knowledge, we introduce class-incremental semantic seg-mentation of 3D point cloud. Unlike 2D images, 3D point clouds are disordered and unstructured, making it difﬁcult to store and transfer knowledge especially when the pre-vious data is not available. We further face the challenge of semantic shift, where previous/future classes are indis-criminately collapsed and treated as the background in the current step, causing a dramatic performance drop on past classes. We exploit the structure of point cloud and pro-pose two strategies to address these challenges. First, we design a geometry-aware distillation module that transfers point-wise feature associations in terms of their geomet-ric characteristics. To counter forgetting caused by the semantic shift, we further develop an uncertainty-aware pseudo-labelling scheme that eliminates noise in uncertain pseudo-labels by label propagation within a local neighbor-hood. Our extensive experiments on S3DIS and ScanNet in a class-incremental setting show impressive results compa-rable to the joint training strategy (upper bound). Code is available at: https://github.com/leolyj/3DPC-CISS 1.

Introduction
The semantic segmentation of 3D point cloud plays a crucial role in applications such as virtual reality, robotics and autonomous vehicles. In recent years, a number of point cloud segmentation methods [16, 28, 29, 38, 39, 45] have
Corresponding Author: Yinjie Lei (yinjie@scu.edu.cn) base(cid:36)
Geometry-aware Feature-relation Transfer (GFT) 
Sec. 3.2
Uncertainty-aware Pseudo-label Generation (UPG) 
Sec. 3.3
Training on Novel 
Classes {chair,  clutter}
Input Novel Point Cloud
Mixed Labels (cid:36) novel
Pesudo Labels (cid:711)
=
Novel Labels
Novel model for Inference on  both Base and Novel classes
Novel Model
Pesudo Labels Prediction Branch
Figure 1. To continually learn new categories without forgetting the previous ones, we leverage Geometry-aware Feature-relation
Transfer (Sec. 3.2) to distill point-wise relationships from the base model and further employ Uncertainty-aware Pseudo-label Gener-ation (Sec. 3.3) to synthesize pseudo labels of old classes with low uncertainty as guidance for novel model training. achieved remarkable performance in the traditional setting where all classes are learned at once. Nevertheless, new categories are gradually discovered in real-life scenarios, and updating the model to cater for these new categories re-quires large memory storage and expensive re-training. In such situations, as illustrated in Fig. 1, class-incremental learning provides a promising paradigm, since it enables progressively learning novel knowledge in an efﬁcient man-ner while preserving the previous capabilities.
The existing research on class-incremental learning is mostly on 2D image classiﬁcation [17,19,21,32] with some efforts extended to RGB semantic segmentation [3, 4, 10, 41]. These methods employ a strategy based upon regu-larization [11, 19, 44], rehearsal/replay [2, 17, 24, 32, 35] or knowledge distillation [8, 20, 21] to preserve previous knowledge. At present, only a few works have investigated
3D point clouds based incremental learning for classiﬁca-tion [5, 6, 9, 22, 43]. They focus on the classiﬁcation of an individual object and extend 2D methods to 3D. Unlike classiﬁcation which only considers a single object (not the scene with multiple objects), continually learning to seg-ment 3D point cloud in complex scenes introduces multiple new challenges and has not been previously studied. 3D point clouds are disordered and unstructured, which makes it difﬁcult to preserve previous knowledge and re-sults in catastrophic forgetting [13,33,36]. This speciﬁcally becomes pronounced when old data is not available. We further observe that the 3D class-incremental segmentation faces the phenomenon of semantic shift, where the points belonging to old classes are indiscriminately collapsed into background during the current learning step. The semantic shift further suppresses the capability of the model to rec-ognize old categories, thus exacerbating forgetting.
In this paper, we are the ﬁrst to propose a class-incremental learning approach for 3D point cloud seman-tic segmentation. To prevent forgetting caused by unstruc-tured point clouds, we design a Geometry-aware Feature-relation Transfer (GFT) strategy to transfer the structural re-lationships among point features. Moreover, to address the semantic shift issue, we assign uncertainty-aware pseudo-labels to the background points. Different from the con-ventional approaches, where pseudo-labels are directly ob-tained from the old model, we estimate uncertainties ac-cording to the distribution characteristics of points, and leverage the neighborhood information to propagate labels from low to high uncertainties. Our Uncertainty-aware
Pseudo-label Generation (UPG), therefore, assists in elimi-nating the inﬂuence of noisy labels and helps tackle the se-mantic shift issue. Note that our approach does not involve any rehearsal or memory replay buffer to store old data or its annotations during the incremental process. We show promises of our approach through comprehensive evalua-tions on benchmarks deﬁned on public datasets i.e., S3DIS
[1] and ScanNet [7]. Our key contributions are:
• A class-incremental learning framework for 3D point cloud semantic segmentation, to sequentially adapt to new classes from previous acquired knowledge.
• To transfer previous knowledge and prevent forgetting caused by unstructured nature of the point clouds, we propose a Geometry-aware Feature-relation Transfer (GFT) module that captures the point-wise feature re-lations based on the geometric information.
• To tackle the semantic shift issue where old classes are indiscriminately collapsed into the background, we design an Uncertainty-aware Pseudo-label Generation (UPG) strategy to enhance pseudo-labelling quality and thus provide effective guidance for old classes.
• Compared with several baselines on multiple bench-marks, our approach achieves promising results for 3D class-incremental semantic segmentation, closer to the joint training (upper bound) using all data at once. 2.