Abstract
Entangled representation of clothing and identity (ID)-intrinsic clues are potentially concomitant in conventional person Re-IDentiﬁcation (ReID). Nevertheless, eliminating the negative impact of clothing on ID remains challenging due to the lack of theory and the difﬁculty of isolating the exact implications. In this paper, a causality-based Auto-Intervention Model, referred to as AIM1, is ﬁrst proposed to mitigate clothing bias for robust cloth-changing person ReID (CC-ReID). Speciﬁcally, we analyze the effect of clothing on the model inference and adopt a dual-branch model to simulate causal intervention. Progressively, clothing bias is eliminated automatically with model training. AIM is encouraged to learn more discriminative ID clues that are free from clothing bias. Extensive experiments on two stan-dard CC-ReID datasets demonstrate the superiority of the proposed AIM over other state-of-the-art methods. 1.

Introduction
Short-term person Re-IDentiﬁcation (ReID) aims to match a person within limited time and space conditions, under the assumption that each individual maintains clothing consistency. Of both traditional and deep learning methods, the best way to deceive current ReID models is by having pedestrians alter their clothing. This highlights the inade-quacy of existing short-term ReID methods [4, 42, 45]. To solve this issue, Cloth-Changing person ReID (CC-ReID) [2] has been recently explored, which is increasingly critical in public security systems for tracking down disguised criminal suspects. For example, witnesses typically provide descrip-tive details (e.g., clothing, color, and stature) when describ-ing suspects, but it is unlikely that criminals will wear the same clothes upon their reappearance. It follows that cloth-ing information will disrupt the existing ReID system [40],
*Corresponding author: wangzwhu@whu.edu.cn. 1 Codes will publicly available at https://github.com/BoomShakaY/AIM-CCReID.
Camera #1
Entangled
Entangled
Camera #2
ID
Non-ID (Clothing, et al.) match
Latent space
ID
Non-ID (Clothing, et al.)
Person #1
Probe (a) Entangled representation of clothing and ID 
Gallery
Person #1
ID classification match 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2
ID C
ID A
ID B
ID C (b) Clothing affect person recognition
Figure 1. Illustration of the entangled representation of clothing and ID and how clothing bias affects model prediction. which leads to a growing need felt by the research commu-nity to study CC-ReID task.
As one of the accompanying objects of people, clothing is an essential factor in social life. There are two possible responses when people identify others: confusing the per-ception of identity (ID) or clearly distinguishing different
IDs through immutable visual appearance (faces or soft-biometrics). The former manifests as the mix-up of IDs due to the similarity in ﬂexible visual appearance (e.g., cloth-ing) of people, while the latter is caused by the high-level semantic (e.g., ID-clues) perceived by humans, transcending the similarity that comes with clothing. The above reactions reﬂect that the relevance of clothing to ID is a double-edged sword. Traditionally, clothing is a helpful characteristic for
ReID, where people wearing the same clothes are likely to have the same ID. However, entangled representation of clothing and ID leads the statistical-based neural networks to converge towards shallow clothing features that can be easily distinguished. This statistical association gives the
ReID model a faulty perception that there is a strong rela-tion between clothing and ID, which would undermine the ultimate prediction for seeking robust and sensible results.
Recent years have witnessed numerous deep learning at-tempts to model discriminative clues for person distinguish-able learning. However, plenty of misleading information exists in these attempts, as some non-ID areas (e.g., clothing
and background) may correlate highly with ID. As shown in Fig. 1(a), conventional ReID methods focus on image regions with distinct discrimination characteristics [33, 46], leading to the entanglement of clothing and ID-intrinsic clues. In CC-ReID, this phenomenon will lead to biased classiﬁcation, misleading the ReID model to focus on the non-ID areas that appear to be ID-related. As shown in
Fig. 1(b), clothing may mislead the classiﬁer by giving high scores to person images with similar colors or patterns, but ignoring the faces and details that matter. To this end, if clothing bias can be captured and removed from the exist-ing model, it will enhance the contribution of genuinely
ID-relevant features to ID discrimination.
Lacking practical tools to alleviate clothing bias makes it challenging to correct the misleading attention of the current
ReID model. Even knowing that clothing is a critical inﬂu-encing factor, it is not apparent how to intervene in clothing directly in the representation space. Not to mention that rough negligence on clothing will damage the integrity of person representation, e.g., the mask-based [12, 16, 41] and gait-based methods [6, 17] try to obtain cloth-agnostic rep-resentations by forcibly covering up or neglecting clothing information. While effective, these straightforward methods lose a plethora of semantic information and overlook the factual relation between clothing and real ID.
Causal inference is a recently emerging theory [19] widely used to extract causality [10] and explore the true association between two events [25]. Thanks to causal in-ference, we can revisit the issue of clothing bias from a causal perspective. The ladder of causality [7] divides cogni-tive abilities into three levels from low to high: association, intervention, and counterfactual analysis. Many aforemen-tioned research works explore CC-ReID from the surface level of data association, while more advanced cognitive is not covered. Intervention allows us to incorporate clothing knowledge into the model prediction and eliminate the cor-responding effects, in contrast to counterfactual data, which are difﬁcult to obtain under strict variable control. Therefore, this paper attempts to start with intervention by examining the perturbation of clothing on the results and removing such perturbation from model predictions. Through the causal intervention, we attempt to remove the effect of clothing without destroying semantic integrity and further optimizing the learned discriminative features.
To bring the theoretical intervention into practice, we de-sign a dual-branch model to capture clothing bias and ID clues separately and strip clothing inference from ID repre-sentation learning to simulate the entire intervention process.
The clothing branch represents the model’s perception of clothing, breaking the false association between clothing and
ID brought by the entangled representation. Subsequently, while maintaining semantic integrity, this paper achieves bias elimination and improves the robustness of ID representa-tion by constantly mitigating the inﬂuence of clothing on ID classiﬁcation. Further, to improve the accuracy of clothing bias distillation, as clothing has top-middle-bottom charac-teristics, this paper adopts pyramid matching strategy [8] to enhance the partial feature representation of clothing. Ad-ditionally, we introduce two learning objectives explicitly designed to encourage clothing mitigation. A knowledge transfer objective is adopted to strengthen the perception of clothing bias entangled with ID-intrinsic representation. A bias elimination objective is utilized to cooperate with the causal auto-intervention for ID-intrinsic feature extraction. (AIM)
Our contributions can be summarized threefold:
• We propose a novel causality-based Auto-Intervention
Model for Cloth-Changing person Re-IDentiﬁcation (CC-ReID). The proposed AIM guarantees that the learned representation is unaffected by clothing bias. To the best of our knowledge, AIM is the ﬁrst model to introduce causality into CC-ReID.
• A dual-branch model is proposed to simulate the causal intervention. Clothing bias is gradually stripped from the entangled ID-clothing representation without de-stroying semantic integrity, which optimizes the ID-intrinsic feature learning.
• We comprehensively demonstrate how clothing bias affects the current ReID model and highlight the signif-icance of causal inference in CC-ReID. The experimen-tal results on two CC-ReID datasets, PRCC-ReID [38] and LTCC-ReID [26], show that AIM outperforms state-of-the-art methods. 2.