Abstract
Parsing an unstructured point set into constituent local geometry structures (e.g., edges or surfaces) would be help-ful for understanding and representing point clouds. This motivates us to design a deep architecture to model the hierarchical geometry from points, edges, surfaces (trian-gles), to super-surfaces (adjacent surfaces) for the thor-ough analysis of point clouds.
In this paper, we present a novel Hierarchical Geometry Network (HGNet) that in-tegrates such hierarchical geometry structures from super-surfaces, surfaces, edges, to points in a top-down man-ner for learning point cloud representations. Technically, we first construct the edges between every two neighbor points. A point-level representation is learnt with edge-to-point aggregation, i.e., aggregating all connected edges into the anchor point. Next, as every two neighbor edges com-pose a surface, we obtain the edge-level representation of each anchor edge via surface-to-edge aggregation over all neighbor surfaces. Furthermore, the surface-level repre-sentation is achieved through super-surface-to-surface ag-gregation by transforming all super-surfaces into the an-chor surface. A Transformer structure is finally devised to unify all the point-level, edge-level, and surface-level fea-tures into the holistic point cloud representations. Extensive experiments on four point cloud analysis datasets demon-strate the superiority of HGNet for 3D object classification and part/semantic segmentation tasks. More remarkably,
HGNet achieves the overall accuracy of 89.2% on ScanOb-jectNN, improving PointNeXt-S by 1.5%. 1.

Introduction
With the growing popularity of 3D acquisition technolo-gies (such as 3D scanners, RGBD cameras, and LiDARs), 3D point cloud analysis has been a fast-developing topic in the past decade. Practical point cloud analysis systems have great potential for numerous applications, e.g., autonomous driving, robotics, and virtual reality. In comparison to 2D
RGB image data, 3D data of point clouds has an additional dimension of depth, leading to a three dimensional world as
Figure 1. The progressive development of a four-level hierarchi-cal geometry structure among points, edges, surfaces, and super-surfaces. Such hierarchical geometry structure further in turn strengthens surface-level, edge-level, and point-level features in a top-down manner. in our daily life. The 3D point clouds are armed with several key merits, e.g., preserving rich geometry information and being invariant to lighting conditions. Nevertheless, consid-ering that point clouds are naturally unstructured without any discretization, it is not trivial to directly applying the typical CNN operations widely adopted in 2D vision over the primary point set for analyzing 3D data.
To alleviate this limitation, a series of efforts have at-tempted to interpret the geometry information rooted in unstructured point clouds, such as the regular point-based
[30, 38], edge/relation-based [32, 46], or surface-based [39] representations. For instance, PointNet [30] builds up the foundation of regular point-based feature extraction via stacked Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) plus symmetric aggregation. The subsequent works (e.g., PointNet++ [32] and DGCNN [46]) further incorporate edge/relation-based features by using set abstraction or graph models for aggre-gating/propagating points and edges, pursuing the mining of finer geometric structures. More recently, RepSurf [39] learns surface-based features over triangle meshes to enable an amplified expression of local geometry. Despite showing encouraging performances, most existing point cloud anal-ysis techniques lack a thorough understanding of the com-positional local geometry structures in the point clouds.
In this work, we propose to mitigate this issue from the standpoint of parsing an unstructured point set into a hierarchical structure of constituent local geometry struc-tures to comprehensively characterize the point clouds. Our launching point is to construct a bottom-up local hierarchi-cal topology from the leaf level of irregular and unordered points, to the intermediary levels of edges and surfaces, and the root level of super-surfaces (i.e., adjacent surfaces). Fig-ure 1 conceptually depicts the progressive development of a hierarchical geometry structure for a local set of points.
Such hierarchical structure in turn triggers the reinforce-ment of 3D model capacity for capturing comprehensive ge-ometry information. The learning of multi-granular geom-etry features, i.e., surface-level, edge-level, and point-level features, is enhanced by aggregating geometry information from super-surfaces, surfaces, or edges derived from the hi-erarchical topology in a top-down fashion.
By consolidating the idea of delving into the local hier-archical geometry in point clouds, we present a new Hier-archical Geometry Network (HGNet) to facilitate the learn-ing of point cloud representations. Specifically, we con-struct a four-level hierarchy among points, edges, surfaces, and super-surfaces. The edges are first built between two neighbor points and each is extended to a surface (trian-gle) by connecting another neighbor point. The adjacent surfaces are then grouped as a super-surface. Next, HGNet executes top-down feature aggregation from super-surfaces, surfaces, and edges, leading to three upgraded geometry features of surfaces, edges, and points, respectively. Finally, we capitalize on a Transformer structure to unify these re-fined surface-level, edge-level, and point-level geometry features with holistic contextual information, thereby im-proving point cloud analysis.
We analyze and evaluate our HGNet through extensive experiments over multiple 3D vision tasks for point cloud analysis (e.g., 3D object classification and part/semantic segmentation tasks), which empirically demonstrate its su-perior advantage against state-of-the-art backbones. More remarkably, on the real-world challenging benchmark of
ScanObjectNN, HGNet achieves to-date the best published overall accuracy of 89.2%, which absolutely improves
PointNeXt-S (87.7%) with 1.5%. For part and semantic segmentation on PartNet and S3DIS datasets, HGNet sur-passes PosPool and PointNeXt by 1.8% and 1.8% in mIoU. 2.