Abstract
Automatically estimating 3D skeleton, shape, camera viewpoints, and part articulation from sparse in-the-wild image ensembles is a severely under-constrained and chal-lenging problem. Most prior methods rely on large-scale image datasets, dense temporal correspondence, or human annotations like camera pose, 2D keypoints, and shape tem-plates. We propose Hi-LASSIE, which performs 3D articu-lated reconstruction from only 20-30 online images in the wild without any user-defined shape or skeleton templates.
We follow the recent work of LASSIE that tackles a similar problem setting and make two significant advances. First, instead of relying on a manually annotated 3D skeleton, we automatically estimate a class-specific skeleton from the selected reference image. Second, we improve the shape reconstructions with novel instance-specific optimization strategies that allow reconstructions to faithful fit on each instance while preserving the class-specific priors learned
*Work done as a student researcher at Google. across all images. Experiments on in-the-wild image en-sembles show that Hi-LASSIE obtains higher fidelity state-of-the-art 3D reconstructions despite requiring minimum user input. Project page: chhankyao.github.io/ hi-lassie/ 1.

Introduction 3D assets of articulated animals enable numerous appli-cations in games, movies, AR/VR, etc. However, building high-fidelity 3D models of articulated shapes like animal bodies is labor intensive either via manual creation or 3D scanning. Recent advances in deep learning and 3D rep-resentations have significantly improved the quality of 3D reconstruction from images. Much of the success depends on the availability of either rich 3D annotations or multi-view captures, both of which are not always available in a real-world scenario. A more practical and scalable alter-native is automatic 3D reconstruction from online images as it is straightforward to obtain image ensembles of any animal category (e.g., image search results). In this work,
Figure 2. User inputs across different techniques for articulated animal reconstruction. Contrary to prior methods that leverage detailed 3D shapes or skeletons, Hi-LASSIE only requires the user to select a reference image where most animal body parts are visible. we tackle a practical problem setting introduced in a recent work, LASSIE [38], where the aim is to automatically esti-mate articulated 3D shapes with only a few (20-30) in-the-wild images of an animal species, without any image-level 2D or 3D annotations.
This problem is highly under-constrained and challeng-ing due to a multitude of variations within image ensembles.
In-the-wild images usually have diverse backgrounds, light-ing, and camera viewpoints. Moreover, different animal in-stances can have distinct 2D appearances due to pose ar-ticulations, shape variations, and surface texture variations (skin colors, patterns, and lighting). As shown in Fig. 2, early approaches in this space try to simplify the problem with some user-defined 3D templates, hurting the general-ization of those techniques to classes where such templates are not always readily available. In addition, most of these methods (except LASSIE [38]) assume either large-scale training images of each animal species [16, 17, 43] or per-image 2D keypoint annotations [44], which also limits their scalability.
In this work, we propose a more practical technique that does not require any 3D shape or skeleton templates. In-stead, as illustrated in Fig. 2, the user simply has to se-lect a reference image in the ensemble where all the ani-mal parts are visible. We achieve this by providing two key technical advances over LASSIE: 1) 3D skeleton discovery and 2) instance-specific optimization strategies. Our over-all framework, named Hi-LASSIE, can produce Higher-fidelity articulated shapes than LASSIE [38] while requir-ing minimal human input. Our key insight is to exploit the 2D part-level correspondences for 3D skeleton discov-ery. Recent works [1, 32] observe that the deep features ex-tracted from a self-supervised vision transformer (ViT) [11] like DINO-ViT [7] can provide good co-part segmentation across images. We further exploit such features to rea-son about part visibility and their symmetry. At a high level, we first obtain a 2D skeleton using the animal silhou-ette and part clusters [1] obtained from DINO features [7].
We then uplift this 2D skeleton into 3D using symmet-ric part information that is present in the deep DINO fea-tures. Fig. 1 shows the skeleton for zebra images discov-ered by Hi-LASSIE. Similar to LASSIE [38], we leverage 3D part priors (learned from and shared across instances) and the discovered 3D skeleton to regularize the articu-lated shape learning. Furthermore, we design three novel modules to increase the quality of output shapes: 1) High-resolution optimization by zooming in on individual parts, 2) Surface feature MLPs to densely supervise the neural part surface learning, and 3) Frequency-based decomposi-tion of part surfaces for shared and instance-specific com-ponents. Note that Hi-LASSIE can generalize to diverse animal species easily as it does not require any image anno-tations or category-specific templates.
We conduct extensive experiments on the Pascal-Part [8] and LASSIE [38] image ensembles, which contain in-the-wild images of various animal species like horse, elephant, and penguin. Compared with LASSIE and other baselines, we achieve higher reconstruction accuracy in terms of key-point transfer, part transfer, and 2D IOU metrics. Quali-tatively, Hi-LASSIE reconstructions show considerable im-provement on 3D geometric and texture details as well as faithfulness to input images. Finally, we demonstrate sev-eral applications like animation and motion re-targeting en-abled by our 3D part representation. Fig. 1 (right) shows some Hi-LASSIE 3D reconstructions for different animal species. The main contributions of this work are:
• To our best knowledge, Hi-LASSIE is the first approach to discover 3D skeletons of articulated animal bodies from in-the-wild image ensembles without using any image-level annotations. We show that the discovered 3D skeleton can faithfully fit all instances in the same class and effectively regularize the 3D shape optimization.
• Hi-LASSIE includes several novel optimization strategies that makes the output shapes richer in 3D details and more faithful to each image instance than prior methods.
• Extensive results on multiple animal classes and datasets demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of Hi-LASSIE while requiring less user inputs than prior works. 2.