Abstract
Differences in forgery attributes of images generated in
CNN-synthesized and image-editing domains are large, and such differences make a unified image forgery detection and localization (IFDL) challenging. To this end, we present a hierarchical fine-grained formulation for IFDL represen-tation learning. Specifically, we first represent forgery at-tributes of a manipulated image with multiple labels at different levels. Then we perform fine-grained classifica-tion at these levels using the hierarchical dependency be-tween them. As a result, the algorithm is encouraged to learn both comprehensive features and inherent hierarchi-cal nature of different forgery attributes, thereby improving the IFDL representation. Our proposed IFDL framework contains three components: multi-branch feature extrac-tor, localization and classification modules. Each branch of the feature extractor learns to classify forgery attributes at one level, while localization and classification modules segment the pixel-level forgery region and detect image-level forgery, respectively. Lastly, we construct a hier-archical fine-grained dataset to facilitate our study. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on 7 different benchmarks, for both tasks of IFDL and forgery attribute classification. Our source code and dataset can be found: github.com/CHELSEA234/HiFi-IFDL. 1.

Introduction
Chaotic and pervasive multimedia information sharing offers better means for spreading misinformation [1], and the forged image content could, in principle, sustain re-cent “infodemics” [3]. Firstly, CNN-synthesized images made extraordinary leaps culminating in recent synthesis
E [52] or Google ImageN [57]—based on methods—Dall
· diffusion models (DDPM) [24], which even generates re-alistic videos from text [23, 60]. Secondly, the availability of image editing toolkits produced a substantially low-cost access to image forgery or tampering (e.g., splicing and in-painting). In response to such an issue of image forgery, the computer vision community has made considerable ef-Detection
Real v.s. Forgery
Image Editing
CNN-synthesized
Localization
.5
.4
.3
.2
.1 a e r a y r e g r o f f o e c n a i r a
V n a e
M
/ (a) (b)
Figure 1. (a) In this work, we study image forgery detection and (b) localization (IFDL), regardless of forgery method domains.
The distribution of forgery region depends on individual forgery methods. Each color represents one forgery category (x-axis).
Each bubble represents one image forgery dataset. The y-axis de-notes the average of forgery area. The bubble’s area is proportional to the variance of the forgery area. forts, which however branch separately into two directions: detecting either CNN synthesis [62, 64, 73], or conventional image editing [17,26, 43, 63,68]. As a result, these methods may be ineffective when deploying to real-life scenarios, where forged images can possibly be generated from either
CNN-sythensized or image-editing domains.
To push the frontier of image forensics [59], we study the image forgery detection and localization problem (IFDL)—
Fig. 1a—regardless of the forgery method domains, i.e.,
CNN-synthesized or image editing. It is challenging to de-velop a unified algorithm for two domains, as images, gen-erated by different forgery methods, differ largely from each other in terms of various forgery attributes. For example, a forgery attribute can indicate whether a forged image is fully synthesized or partially manipulated, or whether the forgery method used is the diffusion model generating im-(a) (b) (c)
Figure 2. (a) We represent the forgery attribute of each manipulated image with multiple labels, at different levels. (b) For an input image, we encourage the algorithm to classify its fine-grained forgery attributes at different levels, i.e. a 2-way classification (fully synthesized or partially manipulated) on level 1. (c) We perform the fine-grained classification via the hierarchical nature of different forgery attributes, where each depth l node’s classification probability is conditioned on classification probabilities of neighbor nodes at depth (l − 1). [Key:
Fu. Sy.: Fully Synthesized; Pa. Ma.: Partially manipulated; Diff.: Diffusion model; Cond.: Conditional; Uncond.: Unconditional]. ages from the Gaussian noise, or an image editing process that splices two images via Poisson editing [51]. Therefore, to model such complex forgery attributes, we first repre-sent forgery attribute of each forged image with multiple labels at different levels. Then, we present a hierarchical fine-grained formulation for IFDL, which requires the algo-rithm to classify fine-grained forgery attributes of each im-age at different levels, via the inherent hierarchical nature of different forgery attributes.
Fig. 2a shows the interpretation of the forgery attribute with a hierarchy, which evolves from the general forgery attribute, fully-synthesized vs partial-manipulated, to spe-cific individual forgery methods, such as DDPM [24] and
DDIM [61]. Then, given an input image, our method per-forms fine-grained forgery attribute classification at differ-ent levels (see Fig. 2b). The image-level forgery detection benefits from this hierarchy as the fine-grained classification learns the comprehensive IFDL representation to differenti-ate individual forgery methods. Also, for the pixel-level lo-calization, the fine-grained classification features can serve as a prior to improve the localization. This holds since the distribution of the forgery area is prominently correlated with forgery methods, as depicted in Fig. 1b.
In Fig. 2c, we leverage the hierarchical dependency be-tween forgery attributes in fine-grained classification. Each node’s classification probability is conditioned on the path from the root to itself. For example, the classification prob-ability at a node of DDPM is conditioned on the classification probability of all nodes in the path of Forgery
Fully
Synthesis
Diffusion
→
This differs to prior work [44, 45, 68, 71] which assume a
“flat” structure in which attributes are mutually exclusive.
Predicting the entire hierarchical path helps understanding forgery attributes from the coarse to fine, thereby capturing dependencies among individual forgery attributes.
→
Unconditional
→
→
DDPM.
To this end, we propose Hierarchical Fine-grained Net-work (HiFi-Net). HiFi-Net has three components: multi-branch feature extractor, localization module and detection module. Each branch of the multi-branch extractor clas-sifies images at one forgery attribute level. The localiza-tion module generates the forgery mask with the help of a deep-metric learning based objective, which improves the separation between real and forged pixels. The classifica-tion module first overlays the forgery mask with the input image and obtain a masked image where only forged pixels remain. Then, we use partial convolution to process masked images, which further helps learn IFDL representations.
Lastly, to faciliate our study of the hierarchical fine-grained formulation, we construct a new dataset, termed
Hierarchical Fine-grained (HiFi) IFDL dataset.
It con-tains 13 forgery methods, which are either latest CNN-synthesized methods or representative image editing meth-ods. HiFi-IFDL dataset also induces a hierarchical structure on forgery categories to enable learning a classifier for vari-ous forgery attributes. Each forged image is also paired with a high-resolution ground truth forgery mask for the localiza-tion task. In summary, our contributions are as follows:
⋄
We study the task of image forgery detection and local-ization (IFDL) for both image editing and CNN-synthesized domains. We propose a hierarchical fine-grained formula-tion to learn a comprehensive representation for IFDL and forgery attribute classification.
⋄
We propose a IFDL algorithm, named HiFi-Net, which not only performs well on forgery detection and localiza-tion, also identifies a diverse spectrum of forgery attributes.
We construct a new dataset (HiFi-IFDL) to facilitate the hierarchical fine-grained IFDL study. When evaluating on 7 benchmarks, our method outperforms the state of the art (SoTA) on the tasks of IFDL, and achieve a competitive performance on the forgery attribute classifications.
⋄ 2.