Abstract
High-fidelity radiance recovery plays a crucial role in scene information reconstruction and understanding. Con-ventional cameras suffer from limited sensitivity in dynamic range, bit depth, and spectral response, etc. In this paper, we propose to use event cameras with bio-inspired silicon sensors, which are sensitive to radiance changes, to re-cover precise radiance values. We reveal that, under active lighting conditions, the transient frequency of event signals triggering linearly reflects the radiance value. We propose an innovative method to convert the high temporal reso-lution of event signals into precise radiance values. The precise radiance values yields several capabilities in image analysis. We demonstrate the feasibility of recovering radi-ance values solely from the transient event frequency (TEF) through multiple experiments. 1.

Introduction
Scene radiance recovery from pixel values of conven-tional frame-based cameras is challenging due to the lim-ited sensitivity of sensors and the non-linear process in the image signal processor. Event cameras like Dynamic
Vision Sensor (DVS) [16] are designed with bio-inspired mechanism that measure the scene radiance changes in an asynchronous manner. Compared with conventional frame-based cameras, event cameras have superior advantages [7], such as very high temporal resolution (in the order of µs), high dynamic range (HDR, up to 120dB), low latency, low power consumption, etc. Due to the specific event triggering mechanism, event cameras only record radiance changes rather than the absolute radiance values. This makes it chal-lenging to directly apply computer vision algorithms de-signed for 2D images containing luminance values for most of the surface points to the data captured by event cameras.
We propose an innovative method for high-fidelity radiance recovery, which benefits various spectroscopic and stereo-scopic vision fields, as shown in Fig. 1.
† Corresponding author
Project page: https://github.com/hjynwa/TEF
Figure 1. The concept of transient event frequency and its capabil-ities. When turning the light source on, an event camera captures event signals in a very short time, the frequency of event trigger-ing during this period encodes the scene radiance. The capabilities of transient event frequency are experimentally verified by vari-ous applications, including color image restoration, hyperspectral imaging, depth sensing, and iso-depth contour reconstruction.
Since the event signals could be triggered from either there are lighting condition changes or object motions, many methods [14, 27, 29, 44] assuming a constant lighting condition to focus on motion. To acquire more dense event signals used for scene analysis, some researchers have pro-posed to use active lighting that can reflect the information about the entire scene from the event signals [20, 32]. Ac-tive lighting can be a transient state by turning on the light, which only takes less than 0.1 second. Under such a circum-stance, the event signals are densely triggered for almost all surface points in the scene, rather than sparsely along the edges. Previous methods [6, 32] have shown that radiance can be recovered by integrating a period of events. How-ever, this approach may suffer from unreliability due to the presence of ghost signals that persist even after the radiance change has ceased [21], resulting in errors in the recovered radiance values. This is caused by the latency and noise
of event triggering, which make it difficult to determine the precise termination timestamp for signal accumulation. As a result, integrating events can be challenging when there are extremely large radiance changes.
In this paper, a new approach for direct recovery of scene radiance from event signals is proposed. We overcome the instability and errors of event signals caused due to large lu-minance changes in a split second by analyzing the transient event frequency (TEF). Events are triggered in a constant frequency during the period of illumination increase, which linearly represents the radiance values of a point. As shown in Fig. 1, our approach transfers the high temporal resolu-tion of event signals into the precise radiance values, and thus inherits the advantages of event cameras, which have low latency, broader spectral and dynamic range response than conventional cameras. Furthermore, we can directly apply computer vision algorithms developed for 2D images to event-radiance images reconstructed from event signals, expanding the potential applications of event cameras.
To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to show that the high temporal resolution of event signals can be converted to relative radiance values by analyzing the triggering frequency under active lighting. Our contribu-tions are summarized as follows: 1) We propose the concept of TEF during the split second of turning light on. It precisely represents the relative radiance values in a scene, which is much more stable and accurate compared to the integration of events and the pixel values from conventional cameras. 2) We reveal the linear relationship between TEF and ra-diance values, which yields several capabilities, in-cluding color image restoration, hyperspectral mea-surement, depth sensing, and iso-depth contour recon-struction. 3) We calibrate the linearity of TEF and measure the spectral response function of the event camera. Mul-tiple experiments validate the broad response and ro-bust precision of radiance values recovered from TEF in spectroscopic and stereoscopic vision fields. 2.