Abstract
In this paper, we focus on the problem of category-level object pose estimation, which is challenging due to the large intra-category shape variation. 3D graph convolution (3D-GC) based methods have been widely used to extract local geometric features, but they have limitations for complex shaped objects and are sensitive to noise. Moreover, the scale and translation invariant properties of 3D-GC restrict the perception of an object’s size and translation informa-tion. In this paper, we propose a simple network structure, the HS-layer, which extends 3D-GC to extract hybrid scope latent features from point cloud data for category-level ob-ject pose estimation tasks. The proposed HS-layer: 1) is able to perceive local-global geometric structure and global information, 2) is robust to noise, and 3) can encode size and translation information. Our experiments show that the simple replacement of the 3D-GC layer with the proposed
HS-layer on the baseline method (GPV-Pose) achieves a significant improvement, with the performance increased by 14.5% on 5◦2cm metric and 10.3% on IoU75. Our method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods by a large margin (8.3% on 5◦2cm, 6.9% on IoU75) on REAL275 dataset and runs in real-time (50 FPS)1. 1.

Introduction
Accurate and efficient estimation of an object’s pose and size is crucial for many real-world applications [48], in-cluding robotic manipulation [15], augmented reality [36],
In these appli-and autonomous driving, among others.
*The corresponding author. 1Code is available: https://github.com/Lynne-Zheng-Linfang/HS-Pose
Figure 1. Illustration of the hybrid scope feature extraction of the
HS-layer. As shown in the right figure, the proposed HS-layer possesses various advantages, including the capability of capturing both local and global geometric information, robustness to outliers, and the encoding of scale and translation information. Building upon the GPV-pose, the HS-layer is employed to develop a category-level pose estimation framework, namely HS-Pose. Upon receiving an input point cloud, HS-Pose outputs the estimated 6D pose and 3D size of the object, as shown in the left fig-ure. Given the strengths of the HS-layer, HS-Pose is capable of handling complex object shapes, exhibits robustness to outliers, and achieves better performance compared with existing methods. cations, it is essential that pose estimation algorithms can handle the diverse range of objects encountered in daily life. While many existing works [3, 13, 29, 50] have demon-strated impressive performance in estimating an object’s pose, they typically focus on only a limited set of ob-jects with known shapes and textures, aided by CAD mod-els.
In contrast, category-level object pose estimation al-gorithms [7, 22, 34, 45, 49] address all objects within a given category and enable pose estimation of unseen objects during inference without the target objects’ CAD models,
which is more suitable for daily-life applications. However, developing such algorithms is more challenging due to the shape and texture diversity within each category.
In recent years, category-level object pose estimation re-search [5, 55, 56] has advanced rapidly by adopting state-of-the-art deep learning methods. [2, 46] gain the ability to generalize by mapping the input shape to normalized or metric-scale canonical spaces and then recovering the ob-jects’ poses via correspondence matching. Better handling of intra-category shape variation is also achieved by lever-aging shape priors [4, 42, 56], symmetry priors [20], or do-main adaptation [17,21]. Additionally, [5] enhances the per-ceptiveness of local geometry, and [7, 55] exploit geometric consistency terms to improve the performance further.
Despite the remarkable progress of existing methods, there is still room for improvement in the performance of the category-level object pose estimation. Reconstruction and matching-based methods [17, 42, 46] are usually lim-ited in speed due to the time-consuming correspondence-matching procedure. Recently, various methods [5, 7, 20, 55, 56] built on 3D graph convolution (3D-GC) [23] have achieved impressive performance and run in real-time.
They show outstanding local geometric sensitivity and the ability to generalize to unseen objects. However, only look-ing at small local regions impedes their ability to leverage the global geometric relationships that are essential for han-dling complex geometric shapes and makes them vulnerable to outliers. In addition, the scale and translation invariant nature of 3D-GC restrict the perception of object size and translation information.
To overcome the limitations of 3D-GC in category-level object pose estimation, we propose the hybrid scope latent feature extraction layer (HS-layer), which can perceive both local and global geometric relationships and has a better awareness of translation and scale. Moreover, the proposed
HS-layer is highly robust to outliers. To demonstrate the ef-fectiveness of the HS-layer, we replace the 3D-GC layers in
GPV-Pose [7] to construct a new category-level object pose estimation framework, HS-pose. This framework signifi-cantly outperforms the state-of-the-art method and runs in real time. Our approach extends the perception of 3D-GC to incorporate other essential information by using two paral-lel paths for information extraction. The first path encodes size and translation information (STE), which is missing in 3D-GC due to its invariance property. The second path ex-tracts outlier-robust geometric features using the receptive field with the feature distance metric (RF-F) and the outlier-robust feature extraction layer (ORL).
The main contribution of this paper is as follows:
• We propose a network architecture, the hybrid scope that can latent feature extraction layer (HS-layer), simultaneously perceive local and global geometric structure, encode translation and scale information, and extract outlier-robust feature information. Our proposed HS-layer balances all these critical aspects necessary for category-level pose estimation.
• We use the HS-layer to develop a category-level pose estimation framework, HS-Pose, based on GPV-Pose.
The HS-Pose, when compared to its parent frame-work, has an advantage in handling complex geometric shapes, capturing object size and translation while be-ing robust to noise.
• We conduct extensive experiments and show that the proposed method can handle complex shapes and out-performs the state-of-the-art methods by a large mar-gin while running in real-time (50FPS). 2.