Abstract 1.

Introduction
The relatively hot temperature of the human body causes people to turn into long-wave infrared light sources. Since this emitted light has a larger wavelength than visible light, many surfaces in typical scenes act as infrared mirrors with strong specular reﬂections. We exploit the thermal reﬂec-tions of a person onto objects in order to locate their posi-tion and reconstruct their pose, even if they are not visible to a normal camera. We propose an analysis-by-synthesis framework that jointly models the objects, people, and their thermal reﬂections, which combines generative models with differentiable rendering of reﬂections. Quantitative and qualitative experiments show our approach works in highly challenging cases, such as with curved mirrors or when the person is completely unseen by a normal camera.
One of the major goals of the computer vision commu-nity is to locate people and reconstruct their poses in every-day environments. What makes thermal cameras particu-larly interesting for this task is the fact that humans are often the hottest objects in indoor environments, thus becoming infrared light sources. Humans have a relatively stable body temperature of 37 degrees Celcius, which according to the
Stefan-Boltzmann law, turns people into a light source with constant brightness under long-wave infrared (LWIR). This makes LWIR images a robust source of signals of human activities under many different light and camera conditions.
Since infrared light on the LWIR spectrum has a wave-length that is much longer than visible light (8µm-14µm vs. 0.38µm-0.7µm), the objects in typical scenes look qualita-tively very different from human vision. Many surfaces of
objects in our daily life – such as a ceramic bowl, a stainless steel fridge, or a polished wooden table top – have stronger specular reﬂections than in the visible light spectrum [7,58].
Figure 1 shows the reﬂection of a person with the surface of salad bowls, which is barely visible to the naked eye, if at all, but clearly salient in the LWIR spectrum.
In cluttered environments, a visible light camera may not always be able to capture the person, such as due to a limited
ﬁeld of view or occlusions. In such scenes, the ideal scene for locating and reconstructing a person would be an envi-ronment full of mirrors. This is what the world looks like under the LWIR spectrum. Infrared mirrors are abundant in the thermal modality, and reﬂections reveal signiﬁcant non-line-of-sight information about the surrounding world.
In this paper, we introduce a method that uses the image of a thermal reﬂection in order to reconstruct the position and pose of a person in a scene. We develop an analysis-by-synthesis framework to model objects, people, and their thermal reﬂections in order to reconstruct people and ob-jects. Our approach combines generative models with dif-ferentiable rendering to infer the possible 3D scenes that are compatible with the observations. Given a thermal image, our approach optimizes for the latent variables of generative models such that light emitting from the person will reﬂect off the object and arrive at the thermal camera plane.
Our approach works in highly challenging cases where the object acts as a curved mirror. Even when a person is completely unseen by a normal visible light camera, our ap-proach is able to localize and reconstruct their 3D pose from just their thermal reﬂection. Traditionally, the increased specularity of surfaces has posed a challenge to thermog-raphy, making it extremely difﬁcult to measure the surface temperature of a thermally specular surface, which brings out a line of active research aiming to remove the specular reﬂection for more accurate surface temperature measure-ment [4, 5, 40, 80]. We instead exploit these “difﬁculties” of LWIR to tackle the problem of 3D human reconstruction from a single view of thermal reﬂection image.
The primary contribution of the paper is a method to use the thermal reﬂection of the human body on everyday ob-jects to infer their location in a scene and its 3D structure.
The rest of the paper will analyze this approach in detail.
Section 2 provides a brief overview of related work for 3D reconstruction and differentiable rendering. Section 3 for-mulates an integrated generative model of humans and ob-jects in a scene, then discusses how to perform differen-tiable rendering of reﬂection, which we are able to invert to reconstruct the 3D scene. Section 4 analyzes the capabilities of this approach in the real world. We believe thermal cam-eras are powerful tools to study human activities in daily en-vironments, extending computer vision systems’ ability to function more robustly even under extreme light conditions. 2.