Abstract
Recently, self-attention networks achieve impressive per-formance in point cloud segmentation due to their superior-ity in modeling long-range dependencies. However, com-pared to self-attention mechanism, we find graph convolu-tions show a stronger ability in capturing local geometry information with less computational cost. In this paper, we employ a hybrid architecture design to construct our Graph
Convolution Network with Attentive Filtering (AF-GCN), which takes advantage of both graph convolution and self-attention mechanism. We adopt graph convolutions to ag-gregate local features in the shallow encoder stages, while in the deeper stages, we propose a self-attention-like mod-ule named Graph Attentive Filter (GAF) to better model long-range contexts from distant neighbors. Besides, to fur-ther improve graph representation for point cloud segmen-tation, we employ a Spatial Feature Projection (SFP) mod-ule for graph convolutions which helps to handle spatial variations of unstructured point clouds. Finally, a graph-shared down-sampling and up-sampling strategy is intro-duced to make full use of the graph structures in point cloud processing. We conduct extensive experiments on multi-ple datasets including S3DIS, ScanNetV2, Toronto-3D, and
ShapeNetPart. Experimental results show our AF-GCN ob-tains competitive performance. 1.

Introduction
With the rapid development of 3D sensing technolo-gies (such as LiDARs and RGB-D cameras), 3D point clouds have demonstrated great potential in many applica-tions such as robotics, autonomous driving, virtual reality and augmented reality [10]. Consequently, point cloud seg-mentation has attracted more and more attention. Unlike regular pixel grids in 2D images, 3D points in point clouds are irregular and unstructured, thereby posing significant
Corresponding author: Wei Gao.
Figure 1. (a) and (b) are the input point cloud and corresponding semantic labels, respectively. (c) and (d) are the visualization of the low-level and high-level point features after the first and last down-sampling, respectively. Differences in color indicate differ-ences in features. As shown in (c), neighbors in the same object may have low feature correlations due to the differences in RGB attributes or geometry structures. As shown in (d), points after sev-eral down-sampling are sparse and the distant neighbors in high-level feature aggregation should be filtered because of containing possible irrelevant information. challenges for point cloud segmentation.
Several researches [18, 21, 46] adopt graph convolution networks to utilize the topological structure of point cloud for segmentation. Graph convolution networks learn fea-tures from points and their neighbors for better captur-ing local geometric features while maintaining permuta-tion invariance, which have intrinsic advantages for han-dling non-Euclidean point cloud data. Furthermore, many works [17, 44, 51, 59] improve the graph convolution net-works by proposing well-designed convolution kernels and get promising performance in point cloud segmentation.
Recently inspired by the great success of vision trans-formers [8,11,23,34,56], several works [9,15,36,52,55,58]
introduce self-attention mechanism into point cloud anal-ysis for its superiority in modeling long-range dependen-cies and high-level relations, which obtain significant per-formance improvement, especially in point cloud segmen-tation. However, self-attention mechanism exhibits certain limitations in capturing local geometry information. Com-pared with graph convolutions, self-attention mechanisms require additional computation for feature correlations, and assign large weights to neighbors which have high feature correlations. As illustrated in Figure 1, points in low-level feature learning phases are dense and low-level features are mainly extracted from the colors and geometry structures (like edges, corners and surfaces). Therefore, self-attention mechanisms are inefficient in low-level feature aggregation and may neglect information about neighbors which have considerable differences in colors or geometry structures.
To exploit the advantages of graph convolution in cap-turing local geometry information and self-attention mech-anism in modeling long-range contexts simultaneously, we design a hybrid network, namely Graph Convolution Net-work with Attentive Filtering (AF-GCN). In the shallow stages of the encoder, we adopt graph convolutions to ag-gregate local geometry information. While in the deeper stages, we propose a self-attention-like module in the graph convolution form called Graph Attentive Filter (GAF) to improve graph representation for point cloud segmentation.
Different from previous studies [9, 15, 36, 50, 58], our pro-posed Graph Attentive Filter estimates the correlation be-tween the points from both features and spatial structures in-formation, then suppresses irrelevant information from the distant neighbors to better capture high-level relations.
To further improve our graph convolution networks for point cloud segmentation, we adopt a Spatial Feature Pro-jection (SFP) module for graph convolutions. The spa-tial feature projection module projects the spatial informa-tion of points into the feature space, which helps graph convolutions with isotropic kernels to model spatial vari-ations effectively. Moreover, we design a graph-shared down-sampling and up-sampling strategy to better utilize the graph structures in the decoder. In general, our key con-tributions are summarized as follows:
• We construct a hierarchical graph convolution network
AF-GCN with a hybrid architecture design for point cloud segmentation, which takes advantage of graph convolution and self-attention mechanism.
• We propose a novel Graph Attentive Filters module to suppress irrelevant information from distant neighbors by estimating the correlation between the points from both features and spatial structure information.
• We employ a Spatial Feature Projection module for graph convolutions to handle the spatial variation of ir-regular point clouds. To better exploit the graph struc-tures, we design a graph-shared down-sampling and up-sampling strategy.
• Experimental results demonstrate our model achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple point cloud segmentation datasets. Ablation studies also verify the effectiveness of each proposed component. 2.