Abstract
We introduce Infinigen, a procedural generator of photo-realistic 3D scenes of the natural world. Infinigen is entirely procedural: every asset, from shape to texture, is generated from scratch via randomized mathematical rules, using no external source and allowing infinite variation and composi-tion. Infinigen offers broad coverage of objects and scenes in the natural world including plants, animals, terrains, and natural phenomena such as fire, cloud, rain, and snow. In-finigen can be used to generate unlimited, diverse training data for a wide range of computer vision tasks including object detection, semantic segmentation, optical flow, and 3D reconstruction. We expect Infinigen to be a useful re-source for computer vision research and beyond. Please visit infinigen.org for videos, code and pre-generated data. 1.

Introduction
Data, especially large-scale labeled data, has been a criti-cal driver of progress in computer vision. At the same time, data has also been a major challenge, as many important vision tasks remain starved of high-quality data. This is es-pecially true for 3D vision, where accurate 3D ground truth is difficult to acquire for real images.
Synthetic data from computer graphics is a promis-ing solution to this data challenge. Synthetic data can be generated in unlimited quantity with high-quality la-bels. Synthetic data has been used in a wide range of tasks [10, 18, 44, 46, 52, 55, 65], with notable successes in 3D vision, where models trained on synthetic data can perform well on real images zero-shot [31, 51, 75–78, 82].
Despite its great promise, the use of synthetic data in computer vision remains much less common than real images. We hypothesize that a key reason is the limited diversity of 3D assets: for synthetic data to be maximally useful, it needs to capture the diversity and complexity of the real world, but existing freely available synthetic datasets are mostly restricted to a fairly narrow set of objects and shapes, often driving scenes (e.g. [35, 65]) or human-made
†work done while a student at Princeton University objects in indoor environments (e.g. [25, 53]).
In this work, we seek to substantially expand the cover-age of synthetic data, particularly objects and scenes from the natural world. We introduce Infinigen, a procedural generator of photorealistic 3D scenes of the natural world.
Compared to existing sources of synthetic data, Infinigen is unique due to the combination of the following properties:
• Procedural: Infinigen is not a finite collection of 3D assets or synthetic images; instead, it is a generator that can create infinitely many distinct shapes, textures, materials, and scene compositions. Every asset, from shape to texture, is entirely procedural, generated from scratch via randomized mathematical rules that allow infinite variation and composition. This sets it apart from datasets or dataset generators that rely on external assets.
• Diverse: Infinigen offers a broad coverage of objects and scenes in the natural world, including plants, animals, terrains, and natural phenomena such as fire, cloud, rain, and snow.
• Photorealistic: Infinigen creates highly photorealistic 3D scenes. It achieves high photorealism by procedu-rally generating not only coarse structures but also fine details in geometry and texture.
• Real geometry: unlike in video game assets, which often use texture maps to fake geometrical details (e.g. a surface appears rugged but is in fact flat), all geomet-ric details in Infinigen are real. This ensures accurate geometric ground truth for 3D reconstruction tasks.
• Free and open-source:
Infinigen builds on top of
Blender [17], a free and open-source graphics tool.
Infinigen’s code is released for free under the GPL license, same as Blender. Anyone can freely use
Infinigen to obtain unlimited assets and renders ‡.
‡The output of GPL code is generally not covered by GPL.
See www . gnu . org / licenses / gpl - faq . en . html #
WhatCaseIsOutputGPL
Figure 1. Randomly generated, non cherry-picked images produced by our system. From top left to bottom right: Forest, River, Underwater,
Caves, Coast, Desert, Mountain and Plains. See the supplement for larger, higher resolution samples.
Infinigen focuses on the natural world for two reasons.
First, accurate perception of natural objects is demanded by many applications, including geological survey, drone navigation, ecological monitoring, rescue robots, agriculture automation, but existing synthetic datasets have limited cov-erage of the natural world. Second, we hypothesize that the natural world alone can be sufficient for pretraining powerful
“foundation models”—the human visual system was evolved entirely in the natural world; exposure to human-made ob-jects was likely unnecessary.
Infinigen is useful in many ways. It can serve as a genera-tor of unlimited training data for a wide range of computer vision tasks, including object detection, semantic segmen-tation, pose estimation, 3D reconstruction, view synthesis, and video generation. Because users have access to all the procedural rules and parameters underlying each 3D scene,
Infinigen can be easily customized to generate a large variety of task-specific ground truth. Infinigen can also serve as a generator of 3D assets, which can be used to build simulated environments for training physical robots as well as virtual embodied agents. The same 3D assets are also useful for 3D printing, game development, virtual reality, film production, and content creation in general.
We construct Infinigen on top of Blender [17], a graphics system that provides many useful primitives for procedural generation. Utilizing these primitives we design and imple-ment a library of procedural rules to cover a wide range of natural objects and scenes. In addition, we develop utili-ties that facilitate creation of procedural rules and enable all Blender users including non-programmers to contribute; the utilities include a transpiler that automatically converts
Blender node graphs (intuitive visual representation of pro-cedural rules often used by Blender artists) to Python code.
We also develop utilities to render synthetic images and ex-tract common ground truth labels including depth, occlusion boundaries, surface normals, optical flow, object category, bounding boxes, and instance segmentation. Constructing
Infinigen involves substantial software engineering: the lat-est main branch of Infinigen codebase consists of 40,485 lines of code.
In this paper, we provide a detailed description of our procedural system. We also perform experiments to validate the quality of the generated synthetic data; our experiments suggest that data from Infinigen is indeed useful, especially for bridging gaps in the coverage of natural objects. Finally, we provide an analysis on computational costs including a detailed profiling of the generation pipeline.
We expect Infinigen to be a useful resource for computer vision research and beyond. In future work, we intend to make Infinigen a living project that, through open-source collaboration with the whole community, will expand to cover virtually everything in the visual world. 2.