Abstract
Reliable multi-agent trajectory prediction is crucial for the safe planning and control of autonomous systems. Com-pared with single-agent cases, the major challenge in si-multaneously processing multiple agents lies in modeling complex social interactions caused by various driving in-tentions and road conditions. Previous methods typically leverage graph-based message propagation or attention mechanism to encapsulate such interactions in the format of marginal probabilistic distributions. However, it is in-herently sub-optimal.
In this paper, we propose IPCC-TP, a novel relevance-aware module based on Incremental
Pearson Correlation Coefficient to improve multi-agent in-teraction modeling. IPCC-TP learns pairwise joint Gaus-sian Distributions through the tightly-coupled estimation of the means and covariances according to interactive incre-mental movements. Our module can be conveniently em-bedded into existing multi-agent prediction methods to ex-tend original motion distribution decoders. Extensive ex-periments on nuScenes and Argoverse 2 datasets demon-strate that IPCC-TP improves the performance of baselines by a large margin. 1.

Introduction
Trajectory prediction refers to predicting the future tra-jectories of one or several target agents based on past trajec-tories and road conditions. It is an essential and emerging subtask in autonomous driving [22,27,36,44] and industrial robotics [20, 34, 47].
Previous methods [6, 14, 17, 32, 48] concentrate on
Single-agent Trajectory Prediction (STP), which leverages past trajectories of other agents and surrounding road condi-tions as additional cues to assist ego-motion estimation. De-∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.
Figure 1. Schematic illustration of a driving scene with five agents
①−⑤. (a) IPCC-TP models future interactions for t steps based on joint Gaussian distribution among one-dimensional increments of agents’ displacement d. (b) The values of IPCC represented by ρ on the axis indicate the correlation between agents’ trajectories. In the predicted future, ① and ② interact intensively with ① yielding to ② (ρ12 < 0). ④’s movement does not interfere ⑤ (|ρ45| ≈ 0).
③ is closely following ④ (ρ34 ≤ +1). spite the significant progress made in recent years, its appli-cation is limited. The reason is that simultaneously process-ing all traffic participants remains unreachable, although it is a common requirement for safe autonomous driving.
A straightforward idea to deal with this issue is to di-rectly utilize STP methods on each agent respectively and finally attain a joint collision-free prediction via pairwise collision detection. Such methods are far from reliably handling Multi-agent Trajectory Prediction (MTP) since the search space for collision-free trajectories grows exponen-tially as the number of agents increases, i.e., N agents with
M modes yield M N possible combinations, making such search strategy infeasible with numerous agents. By in-corporating graph-based message propagation or attention mechanism into the framework to model the future interac-tions among multiple agents, [16,30,42] aggregate all avail-able cues to simultaneously predict the trajectories for mul-tiple agents in the format of a set of marginal probability distributions. While these frameworks improve the origi-nal STP baseline to some extent, the estimation based on a set of marginal distributions is inherently sub-optimal [33].
To address this issue, a predictor that can predict a joint probability distribution for all agents in the scene is neces-sary. An intuitive strategy for designing such a predictor is to directly predict all parameters for means and covari-ance matrices, which define the joint probability distribu-tions [38]. To predict a trajectory of T time-steps with N agents and M modes up to 4N 2T M covariance parame-ters are needed. However, such redundant parameterization fails to analyze the physical meaning of covariance parame-ters and also makes it hard to control the invertibility of the covariance matrix.
In this paper, we take a further step to explicitly inter-pret the physical meanings of the individual variances and
Pearson Correlation Coefficients (PCC) inside the covari-ance matrix. Instead of directly modeling the locations of agents at each sampled time, we design a novel movement-based method which we term Incremental PCC (IPCC). It helps to simulate the interactions among agents during driv-ing. IPCC models the increment from the current time to a future state at a specific step. Thereby individual variances capture the local uncertainty of each agent in the Bird-Eye-View without considering social interactions (Figure 1.a), while IPCC indicates the implicit driving policies of two agents, e.g., one agent follows or yields to another agent or the two agents’ motions are irrelevant (Figure 1.b). Com-pared to position-based modeling, IPCC has two advan-tages. First, IPCC models social interactions during driving in a compact manner. Second, since position-based model-ing requires respective processes along the two axes, IPCC can directly model the motion vector, which reduces mem-ory cost for covariance matrix storage by a factor of four and facilitates deployment on mobile platforms, such as au-tonomous vehicles and service robots.
Based on IPCC, we design and implement IPCC-TP, a module for the MTP task. IPCC-TP can be conveniently embedded into existing methods by extending the original motion decoders to boost their performance. Experiments show that IPCC-TP effectively captures the pairwise rele-vance of agents and predicts scene-compliant trajectories.
In summary, the main contributions of this work are threefold:
• We introduce a novel movement-based method, namely IPCC, that can intuitively reveal the physical meaning of pairwise motion relevance and facilitate deployment by reducing memory cost.
• Based on IPCC, we propose IPCC-TP, which is com-patible with state-of-the-art MTP methods and possess the ability to model future interactions with joint Gaus-sian distributions among multiple agents.
• Experiment results show that methods enhanced with
IPCC-TP outperform the original methods by a large margin and become the new state-of-the-art methods. 2.