Abstract
Video steganography is the art of unobtrusively conceal-ing secret data in a cover video and then recovering the secret data through a decoding protocol at the receiver end.
Although several attempts have been made, most of them are limited to low-capacity and fixed steganography. To rectify these weaknesses, we propose a Large-capacity and
Flexible Video Steganography Network (LF-VSN) in this paper. For large-capacity, we present a reversible pipeline to perform multiple videos hiding and recovering through a single invertible neural network (INN). Our method can hide/recover 7 secret videos in/from 1 cover video with promising performance. For flexibility, we propose a key-controllable scheme, enabling different receivers to recover particular secret videos from the same cover video through specific keys. Moreover, we further improve the flexibility by proposing a scalable strategy in multiple videos hid-ing, which can hide variable numbers of secret videos in a cover video with a single model and a single training session. Extensive experiments demonstrate that with the significant improvement of the video steganography perfor-mance, our proposed LF-VSN has high security, large hid-ing capacity, and flexibility. The source code is available at https://github.com/MC-E/LF-VSN . 1.

Introduction
Steganography [10] is the technology of hiding some se-cret data into an inconspicuous cover medium to generate a stego output, which only allows the authorized receiver to recover the secret information. Unauthorized people can only access the content of the plain cover medium, and hard
∗Corresponding author. This work was supported by the King Abdul-lah University of Science and Technology (KAUST) Office of Sponsored
Research through the Visual Computing Center (VCC) funding, SDAIA-KAUST Center of Excellence in Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, and Shenzhen Research Project JCYJ20220531093215035. to detect the existence of secret data. In the current digital world, image and video are commonly used covers, widely applied in digital communication [27], copyright protec-tion [36], information certification [31], e-commerce [26], and many other practical fields [10, 12].
Traditional video steganography methods usually hide messages in the spatial domain or transform domain by manual design. Video steganography in the spatial domain means embedding is done directly to the pixel values of video frames. Least significant bits (LSB) [8,45] is the most well-known spatial-domain method, replacing the n least significant bits of the cover image with the most significant n bits of the secret data. Many researchers have used LSB replacement [6] and LSB matching [34] for video steganog-raphy. The transform-domain hiding [5, 17, 39] is done by modifying certain frequency coefficients of the transformed frames. For instance, [44] proposed a video steganogra-phy technique by manipulating the quantized coefficients of DCT (Discrete Cosine Transformation). [9] proposed to compare the DWT (Discrete Wavelet Transformation) co-efficients of the secret image and the cover video for hid-ing. However, these traditional methods have low hiding capacity and invisibility, easily being cracked by steganaly-sis methods [15, 28, 33].
Recently, some deep-learning methods were proposed to improve the hiding capacity and performance. Early works are presented in image steganography. Baluja [3, 4] pro-posed the first deep-learning method to hide a full-size im-age into another image. Recently, [21, 32] proposed design-ing the steganography model as an invertible neural network (INN) [13,14] to perform image hiding and recovering with a single model. For video steganography, Khare et al. [22] first utilized back propagation neural networks to improve the performance of the LSB-based scheme. [43] is the first deep-learning method to hide a video into another video.
Unfortunately, it simply aims to hide the residual across ad-jacent frames in a frame-by-frame manner, and it requires several separate steps to complete the video hiding and re-Figure 1. Illustration of our large-capacity and flexible video steganography network (LF-VSN). Our LF-VSN reversibly solves multiple videos hiding and recovering with a single model and the same parameters. It has large-capacity, key-controllable and scalable advantages. covering. [35] utilize 3D-CNN to explore the temporal cor-relation in video hiding. However, it utilizes two separated 3D UNet to perform hiding and recovering, and it has high model complexity (367.2 million parameters). While video steganography has achieved impressive success in terms of hiding capacity to hide a full-size video, the more challeng-ing multiple videos hiding has hardly been studied. Also, the steganography pipeline is rigid.
In this paper, we study the large-capacity and flexible video steganography, as shown in Fig. 1. Concretely, we propose a reversible video steganography pipeline, achiev-ing large capacity to hide/recover multiple secret videos in/from a cover video. At the same time, our model complexity is also attractive by combining several weight-sharing designs. The flexibility of our method is twofold.
First, we propose a key-controllable scheme, enabling dif-ferent receivers to recover particular secret videos with spe-cific keys. Second, we propose a scalable strategy, which can hide variable numbers of secret videos into a cover video with a single model and a single training session. To summarize, this work has the following contributions:
• We propose a large-capacity video steganography method, which can hide/recover multiple (up to 7) se-cret videos in/from a cover video. Our hiding and re-covering are fully reversible via a single INN.
• We propose a key-controllable scheme with which dif-ferent receivers can recover particular secret videos from the same cover video via specific keys.
• We propose a scalable embedding module, utilizing a single model and a single training session to satisfy different requirements for the number of secret videos hidden in a cover video.
• Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance with large hiding capacity and flexibility. 2.