Abstract
Everyone is unique. Given the same visual stimuli, peo-ple’s attention is driven by both salient visual cues and their own inherent preferences. Knowledge of visual preferences not only facilitates understanding of fine-grained attention patterns of diverse users, but also has the potential of ben-efiting the development of customized applications. Never-theless, existing saliency models typically limit their scope to attention as it applies to the general population and ig-nore the variability between users’ behaviors. In this paper, we identify the critical roles of visual preferences in atten-tion modeling, and for the first time study the problem of user-aware saliency modeling. Our work aims to advance attention research from three distinct perspectives: (1) We present a new model with the flexibility to capture atten-tion patterns of various combinations of users, so that we can adaptively predict personalized attention, user group attention, and general saliency at the same time with one single model; (2) To augment models with knowledge about the composition of attention from different users, we further propose a principled learning method to understand visual attention in a progressive manner; and (3) We carry out ex-tensive analyses on publicly available saliency datasets to shed light on the roles of visual preferences. Experimen-tal results on diverse stimuli, including naturalistic images and web pages, demonstrate the advantages of our method in capturing the distinct visual behaviors of different users and the general saliency of visual stimuli. 1.

Introduction
With the pervasiveness of a visual attention network in the brain, attention has become an important interface for understanding people’s behavioral patterns. A collection
*Work done during an internship at Google Research.
†Corresponding author
Figure 1. A hierarchy for user-aware saliency modeling, where each level focuses on a different perspective of attention. of studies focus on leveraging human attention to optimize graphical designs [7, 16, 36], web page layouts [8, 37, 45], and user experience in immersive environments [22,38,44].
They demonstrate its usefulness for a broad range of ap-plications, and more importantly, highlight the intertwined nature between attention and users’ preferences [11]. As shown in Figure 1, attention modeling can be formulated as a hierarchy of tasks, i.e., from a sophisticated understanding of individuals’ behaviors (personalized attention), to model-ing the visual behaviors of larger groups (user-group atten-tion), and the saliency of visual stimuli (general saliency).
With the great diversity in attentional behaviors among dif-ferent groups (e.g., attention of users with diverse character-istics, children vs elderly, male vs female, etc.), knowledge of visual preferences can play an essential role in enabling a more fine-grained understanding of attention.
To accurately capture human attention on visual stimuli, considerable efforts have been placed on building saliency prediction models [10, 19, 21, 29, 30]. While achieving op-timistic results for modeling attention of the general popu-lation, there are two key challenges remaining largely unre-solved: (1) Existing models ignore the variability of users’ visual behaviors, and hence do not have the ability to iden-tify fine-grained attention patterns of distinct users; and (2)
Apart from the shortage of models for user-aware saliency modeling, there has also been no attempt to formulate a training paradigm to understand the composition of atten-tion, which hampers the integration of attention from di-verse users. To fill the gap, we concentrate on a new re-search problem for modeling attention of adaptively se-lected users, and tackle the challenge with a new compu-tational model together with a progressive learning method.
At the heart of our saliency model is the incorporation of visual preferences with personalized filters and adap-tive user masks. Unlike conventional methods designed for predicting a single saliency map representing attention of all users, it takes advantage of personalized filters to encode individuals’ attention patterns. The attention pat-terns are adaptively integrated based on a user mask indicat-ing the presence of users in the current sample, which en-ables attention prediction for various combinations of users.
The aforementioned paradigm serves as the foundation for bridging individuals’ preferences with visual saliency, and augments models with more abundant information about fine-grained visual behaviors.
It not only shows promise in modeling attention of specific users, but also benefits the inference of the general saliency.
A key challenge in user-aware saliency modeling is the lack of understanding when aggregating attention from di-verse users. The issue becomes more critical when further considering the joint effects of stimuli and user preferences on visual attention [11], where the former factor may over-shadow the impacts of the latter one, leading to difficul-ties in capturing the variability of users’ attention. Inspired by human learning that acquires knowledge through a set of carefully designed curricula [2], we propose to tackle the aforementioned issues with a progressive learning ap-proach. The essence of our method is to encourage a model to learn the composition of attention from a dynamic set of users, from individuals to user groups representing the general population. Through optimizing on dynamically evolving annotations, it provides opportunities for models to learn both the unique attention patterns of different users and the saliency of visual stimuli.
To summarize, our major contributions are as follows:
• We identify the significance of characterizing visual preferences for attention modeling, and develop a novel model that can predict attention of various users.
• We present a progressive learning method to under-stand the composition of attention and capture its vari-ability between different users.
• We perform extensive experiments and analyses to in-vestigate the roles of visual preferences on tackling the challenges of user-aware and general saliency, and addressing the issues of incomplete users. Results demonstrate that user-aware saliency modeling is ad-vantageous in all the above three aspects. 2.