Abstract
For point cloud reconstruction-related tasks, the recon-struction losses to evaluate the shape differences between reconstructed results and the ground truths are typically used to train the task networks. Most existing works mea-sure the training loss with point-to-point distance, which may introduce extra defects as predeﬁned matching rules may deviate from the real shape differences. Although some learning-based works have been proposed to overcome the weaknesses of manually-deﬁned rules, they still measure the shape differences in 3D Euclidean space, which may limit their ability to capture defects in reconstructed shapes. In this work, we propose a learning-based Contrastive Adver-sarial Loss (CALoss) to measure the point cloud reconstruc-tion loss dynamically in a non-linear representation space by combining the contrastive constraint with the adversar-ial strategy. Speciﬁcally, we use the contrastive constraint to help CALoss learn a representation space with shape sim-ilarity, while we introduce the adversarial strategy to help
CALoss mine differences between reconstructed results and ground truths. According to experiments on reconstruction-related tasks, CALoss can help task networks improve re-construction performances and learn more representative representations.
Figure 1. Sg and So denote ground truths and point clouds gen-erated by the task network. Sp is a positive sample with similar shapes as Sg acquired by perturbation [2]. Matching-based losses measure distances between points matched by different predeﬁned rules. PCLoss [6] learns to extract descriptors in 3D Euclidean space by linearly weighting coordinates according to their dis-tances to predicted center points, while our method dynamically measures the shape differences with distances between learned global representations in the constructed representation space. Lp and Lr denote representation distances between Sg, Sp and Sg,
So, respectively. Ladv is an adversarial loss to maximize represen-r tation distances between Sg, So. Ladv and Lp are used to optimize
CALoss, while Lr is adopted to train the task network. r 1.

Introduction
Point clouds, as the common description for 3D shapes, have been broadly used in many areas such as 3D detec-tion [17, 18] and surface reconstruction [9, 13, 19]. For the point cloud reconstruction-related tasks [5, 7, 11, 16], net-works need to predict point clouds as similar as possible to the ground truths. Reconstruction losses that can dif-ferentiably calculate the shape differences between recon-structed results and ground truths are required to train the task networks. Existing works often use the matching-based
* means the corresponding author reconstruction losses Chamfer Distance (CD) and Earth
Mover’s Distance (EMD) to constrain shape differences.
CD matches points ﬁrstly with their nearest neighbors in another point cloud and then calculates the shape difference as average point-to-point distance, while EMD calculates the average point-to-point distance under an optimization-based global matching. We can ﬁnd that CD and EMD actually measure the distances between matched points in-stead of the distances between shapes. As the predeﬁned matching rules are static and unlearnable, training results of CD and EMD may fall into inappropriate local mini-mums where the reconstruction losses are small but the shapes are obviously different. Learning-based losses in
PFNet [8], PUGAN [10], and CRN [21] introduce extra su-pervision from discriminators trained with the adversarial strategy to ﬁnd the detailed differences. Their reconstruc-tion performances are improved by introducing adversar-ial losses, while they still need CD/EMD to evaluate the basic shape distances and cannot fully get rid of the inﬂu-ence from predeﬁned matching rules. PCLoss [6] presents a reconstruction loss measured by the distances between ex-tracted intermediate descriptors in 3D Euclidean space with-out any manually-deﬁned matching rule, which is updated together with the task network in a generative-adversarial process to search shape differences during training. How-ever, the descriptor extraction in Euclidean space actually limits the searching of shape differences, while the training efﬁciency is also restricted as the descriptors are constructed with dense connections between multiple predicted center points and all points. In summary, existing reconstruction losses mainly rely on distances in 3D Euclidean space to measure the shape differences. r
In this work, we propose a novel framework named Con-trastive Adversarial Loss (CALoss) learning to measure the point cloud reconstruction loss dynamically in a high di-mensional representation space constructed by a series of fully differentiable structures. The differences between our work and existing works are presented in Fig. 1. CALoss is composed of Lp, Lr, and Ladv acquired from distances between global representations.Ladv and Lp are used to op-r timize CALoss, where Lr is used to train the task network.
We introduce Lp as the contrastive constraint to help
CALoss construct a representation space with the shape sim-ilarity that similar shapes should have close representations.
In this way, by adding adversarial loss on representations,
Ladv can guide CALoss to search for the shape differences r between ground truths Sg and reconstructed results So. By updating dynamically according to the reconstructed results in each iteration, CALoss can continuously ﬁnd existing de-fects in reconstructed shapes and prevent the task network from falling into unexpected local minimums. As the mea-surement for shape differences is implemented in non-linear representation space, CALoss has more extensive search-ing space. Besides, the representations adopted to measure shape differences are aggregated with the global pooling operation without any requirement of dense connections as
PCLoss [6], which can improve the training efﬁciency.
Our contribution in this work can be summarized as
• We propose a novel Contrastive Adversarial Loss (CALoss) learning to measure the point cloud reconstruction loss with distances between high-dimensional global representations.
• By combining the contrastive constraint and adversar-ial training strategy, CALoss can construct a represen-tation space where similar shapes have close represen-tations and learn to search for shape differences in this space dynamically during training.
• Experiments on point cloud reconstruction, unsuper-vised classiﬁcation, and point cloud completion con-ﬁrm that CALoss can help the task network improve reconstruction performances and learn more represen-tative representations with higher training efﬁciency. 2.