Abstract
Detecting mirrors from static images has received signif-icant research interest recently. However, detecting mirrors over dynamic scenes is still under-explored due to the lack of a high-quality dataset and an effective method for video mirror detection (VMD). To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work to address the VMD problem from a deep-learning-based perspective. Our observation is that there are often correspondences between the contents inside (re-ﬂected) and outside (real) of a mirror, but such correspon-dences may not always appear in every frame, e.g., due to the change of camera pose. This inspires us to propose a video mirror detection method, named VMD-Net, that can tolerate spatially missing correspondences by considering the mirror correspondences at both the intra-frame level as well as inter-frame level via a dual correspondence mod-ule that looks over multiple frames spatially and tempo-rally for correlating correspondences. We further propose a ﬁrst large-scale dataset for VMD (named VMD-D), which contains 14,987 image frames from 269 videos with corre-sponding manually annotated masks. Experimental results show that the proposed method outperforms SOTA methods from relevant ﬁelds. To enable real-time VMD, our method efﬁciently utilizes the backbone features by removing the redundant multi-level module design and gets rid of post-processing of the output maps commonly used in existing methods, making it very efﬁcient and practical for real-time video-based applications. Code, dataset, and models are available at https:// jiaying.link/ cvpr2023-vmd/ 1.

Introduction
Mirrors appear everywhere. They can adversely affect the performance of computer vision tasks (e.g., depth esti-mation [35], vision-and-language navigation [2], semantic segmentation [49]), due to their fundamental property that they reﬂect objects from their surroundings. Thus, it is nec-*Joint ﬁrst authors.
†Corresponding author.
Image
VCNet
Ours
GT intra-frame correspondence inter-frame correspondence
Figure 1. Although state-of-the-art single-image mirror detection method VCNet [36] performs well on a single image (e.g., the ﬁrst row) by using implicitly intra-frame correspondence, it may fail when the intra-frame cue is weak or even absent in some video frames (e.g., the second and third rows). The lack in exploiting inter-frame information causes the current mirror detection meth-ods to produce inaccurate and inconsistent results when applied to
VMD. In contrast, our method can perform well in both situations by utilizing the proposed dual correspondence module to exploit intra-frame (spatial) and inter-frame (temporal) correspondences. essary to build a robust computer vision model that can dis-tinguish mirrors from their surrounding objects correctly.
Existing single-image mirror detection methods exploit different cues, such as context contrast [42], explicity cor-respondences [22], semantics association [14], and chirality and implicit correspondences [36], to detect mirrors from single RGB input images. Despite these recent efforts being put into the mirror detection problem, none of them focuses on detecting mirrors from videos. However, a lot of real-world computer vision applications are video-based (e.g., robotic navigation, autonomous driving, and surveillance), rather than image-based. Hence, solving the video mirror detection (VMD) problem can beneﬁt these applications.
In this paper, we aim to address the VMD problem.
There are two major challenges with this problem. First, to the best of our knowledge, there are no existing large-scale datasets that can be used for training and evaluation on the
VMD problem. Second, existing mirror detection methods,
⇠ post-processing techniques. As a result, our method is efﬁ-cient for real-time applications. In particular, our method has 5 times fewer network parameters and runs
⇥ faster than the latest state-of-the-art image-based mirror de-tection method, VCNet [36]. We conduct comprehensive experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness and efﬁciency of our proposed method. Experimental results show that our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods from relevant tasks on the proposed large-scale VMD-D dataset. 18
⇠
Our key contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We construct the ﬁrst large-scale video mirror detec-tion dataset, called VMD-D. The new dataset contains 14,988 image frames from 269 videos with precise an-notated masks.
• We propose a novel network, called VMD-Net, to exploit both intra-frame and inter-frame correspon-dences via a dual correspondence (DC) module. This
DC module allows VMD-Net to tolerate occassionally missing correspondences in the temporal dimension.
• Extensive evaluations show that our method outper-forms existing state-of-the-art methods from relevant tasks on our proposed VMD-D dataset. 2.