Abstract
Artificial light sources are often powered by an elec-tric grid, and then their intensities rapidly oscillate in re-sponse to the grid’s alternating current (AC). Interestingly, the flickers of scene radiance values due to AC illumina-tion are useful for extracting rich information on a scene of interest. In this paper, we show that the flickers due to
AC illumination is useful for intrinsic image decomposition (IID). Our proposed method conducts the light source sepa-ration (LSS) followed by the IID under AC illumination. In particular, we reveal the ambiguity in the blind LSS via ma-trix factorization and the ambiguity in the IID assuming the diffuse reflection model, and then show why and how those ambiguities can be resolved via a physics-based approach.
We experimentally confirmed that our method can recover the colors of the light sources, the diffuse reflectance values, and the diffuse and specular intensities (shadings) under each of the light sources, and that the IID under AC illumi-nation is effective for application to auto white balancing. 1.

Introduction
Artificial light sources in our surroundings are often powered by an electric grid, and therefore their intensities rapidly oscillate in response to the grid’s alternating current (AC). Such intensity oscillations cause flickers in the radi-ance values of a scene illuminated by artificial light sources.
The flickers are usually too fast to notice with our naked eyes, but can be captured by using cameras with short ex-posure time settings [32]. It is known that the flickers could make auto white balance unnatural [15].
Interestingly, the flickers are useful for extracting rich in-formation on a scene of interest. Sheinin et al. [28] propose a method for light source separation (LSS) under AC illu-mination. Their method decomposes an image sequence of a scene illuminated by multiple AC light sources into the basis images of the scene, each of which is illuminated by only one of the light sources, and the temporal intensity pro-files of the light sources. They make use of their self-built coded-exposure camera synchronized to AC and the dataset of temporal intensity profiles of various light sources, and then achieve LSS even for dark scenes such as a city-scale scene at night.
In this paper, we show that the flickers due to AC illu-mination is useful also for intrinsic image decomposition (IID). Originally, IID recovers the shading and reflectance images of a scene of interest from a single input image on the basis of the Retinex theory [2,19]. Those intrinsic prop-erties of a scene is useful for computer vision applications such as image segmentation [6], object recognition [25], and shape from shading [14].
Our proposed method assumes a scene illuminated by multiple AC light sources, and recovers the intrinsic prop-erties of the scene and the light sources from an image se-quence captured by using a consumer high speed camera.
In contrast to the conventional methods for IID, our method assumes the dichromatic reflection model [27], and then re-covers the intrinsic properties more than the reflectance and shading images: the colors of the light sources, the diffuse reflectance values, and the diffuse and specular intensities (shadings) under each of the light sources.
Specifically, our proposed method conducts the blind
LSS via matrix factorization followed by the IID assuming the dichromatic reflection model. In particular, we reveal the ambiguity in the blind LSS under AC illumination via matrix factorization [26], and then resolve the ambiguity by integrating the LSS and the IID assuming the diffuse reflec-tion model. Furthermore, we reveal the ambiguity in the
IID assuming the diffuse reflection model under AC illumi-nation, and then resolve the ambiguity on the basis of the dichromatic reflection model by taking specular highlights into consideration 1. 1It is analogous to uncalibrated photometric stereo; the GBR ambigu-ity [3] can be resolved from specularity [8]
To show the effectiveness of our proposed method, we conducted a number of experiments using both synthetic and real images. We confirmed that our method works well, i.e. can resolve the ambiguities in the LSS and the IID on
In addition, we real images as well as synthetic images. show that the IID under AC illumination is effective for ap-plication to auto white balancing.
The main contributions of this study are threefold. First, we tackle a novel problem of the IID under AC illumination.
We conduct the blind LSS via matrix factorization followed by the IID assuming the dichromatic reflection model, and show that the flickers due to AC illumination are useful not only for LSS but also for IID. Second, we reveal the am-biguity in the blind LSS via matrix factorization and the ambiguity in the IID assuming the diffuse reflection model.
Then, we show why and how those ambiguities can be re-solved via a physics-based approach. Third, we experimen-tally confirmed that our method can recover the colors of the light sources, the diffuse reflectance values, and the diffuse and specular intensities (shadings) under each of the light sources, and that the IID under AC illumination is effective for application to auto white balancing. 2.