Abstract
Recent graph-based face clustering methods predict the connectivity of enormous edges, including false positive edges that link nodes with different classes. However, those false positive edges, which connect negative node pairs, have the risk of integration of different clusters when their connectivity is incorrectly estimated. This paper proposes a novel face clustering method to address this problem. The proposed clustering method employs density-based cluster-ing, which maintains edges that have higher density. For this purpose, we propose a reliable density estimation algo-rithm based on local connectivity between K nearest neigh-bors (KNN). We effectively exclude negative pairs from the
KNN graph based on the reliable density while maintaining sufficient positive pairs. Furthermore, we develop a pair-wise connectivity estimation network to predict the connec-tivity of the selected edges. Experimental results demon-strate that the proposed clustering method significantly out-performs the state-of-the-art clustering methods on large-scale face clustering datasets and fashion image clustering datasets. Our code is available at https://github. com/illian01/LCE-PCENet 1.

Introduction
Recently, with the release of large labeled face image datasets [7, 9, 10], there are great progresses of face recog-nition [4, 13, 14, 22]. These data-driven approaches still de-mand massive annotated face data for improving face recog-nition models. Face clustering, which aims to divide enor-mous face images into different clusters, is essential to re-duce annotation costs. Also, face clustering can be used in real-world applications, including photo management and organization of large-scale face images in social media, as well as data collection.
Traditional clustering methods such as K-Means [16] and DBSCAN [5] do not require training steps, but they
∗Corresponding author depend on specific conditions on data distributions and are sensitive to hyper-parameters. Also, they work well on small scale-data but are vulnerable to large-scale data.
Thus, they are not effective to face image data, which con-tains large-scale images and diverse distributions in general.
Recent researches [2,6,12,17,19,24,26] construct the KNN graph and estimate the connectivity between nodes using deep neural networks with supervised-learning, where the connectivity represents the probability whether two nodes belong to the same cluster. For instance, in [19, 24], graph convolution networks (GCNs) are employed to estimate the connectivity between nodes linked with edges in the KNN graph. Also, the transformer [21] is adopted to exploit the relationship among K nearest neighbors and estimate the connectivity between neighbor nodes [17]. Thus, these methods [17,19,24] estimate the connectivity between most edges in the KNN graph, including many false positive edges, which link nodes with different classes (negative pairs). However, clustering performance is significantly de-graded when the connectivity between negative pairs is in-correctly estimated.
Some methods [2, 12, 26] select a small number of edges from the KNN graph to exclude negative pairs and perform classification on the selected pairs only. A GCN-based con-fidence estimator is designed to select edges that link nodes with higher confidence [26]. Density-based methods [2, 12] estimate density for each node to choose edges that are di-rected to cluster centers. They pick only one pair for each node based on the estimated density and determine whether each pair belongs to the same cluster through pairwise clas-sification. They achieve high precision performance by re-ducing negative pairs for classification candidates, but a small number of classification candidates yield relatively low recall performance.
Due to the imperfection of the pairwise classification, the more negative pairs are selected as classification candidates, the more nodes with different classes are likely to be merged in the clustering process. On the other hand, insufficient positive pairs may degrade recall scores since some nodes that belong to the same class cannot be merged. Thus, it is essential to reduce negative pairs while maintaining suffi-cient positive pairs as the pairwise classification candidates for high clustering performance.
In this paper, we propose a novel density estimation method that explores the local connectivity and similarity between K nearest neighbors. First, we construct a KNN graph, where each face image becomes a node, based on the cosine similarity between nodes. Then, we develop a lo-cal connectivity estimation network (LCENet), which takes the features of each node and its K nearest neighbors as an input and provides the local connectivity probability be-tween the pivot node and its K nearest neighbors. We then combine the local connectivity and similarity to estimate the reliable density. We refine the KNN graph based on the node density by selecting edges toward cluster centers to exclude false positive edges from the KNN graph. In the graph refinement, we perform density-based and similarity-based edge selection to reduce negative pairs while increas-ing positive pairs. Given the reconstructed graph, we de-velop a pairwise connectivity estimation network (PCENet) based on intra-class and inter-class similarities to determine whether or not two linked nodes belong to the same clus-ter. Finally, we employ the bread-first search (BFS) to ob-tain clustering results. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed clustering method significantly outper-forms the state-of-the-art clustering methods on large-scale face clustering dataset [7, 25] and fashion image clustering dataset [15].
To summarize, this work has three main contributions.
• We develop LCENet to compute the reliable node den-sity, which effectively excludes negative pairs from the KNN graph while maintaining sufficient positive pairs.
• We design PCENet based on intra-class and inter-class similarities to effectively determine whether two linked nodes belong to the same cluster.
• The proposed clustering method outperforms the state-of-the-arts significantly on various datasets [7, 15, 25]. 2.