Abstract
Neural implicit methods have achieved high-quality 3D object surfaces under slight specular highlights. However, high specular reflections (HSR) often appear in front of tar-get objects when we capture them through glasses. The complex ambiguity in these scenes violates the multi-view consistency, then makes it challenging for recent methods to reconstruct target objects correctly. To remedy this is-sue, we present a novel surface reconstruction framework,
NeuS-HSR, based on implicit neural rendering. In NeuS-HSR, the object surface is parameterized as an implicit signed distance function (SDF). To reduce the interference of HSR, we propose decomposing the rendered image into two appearances: the target object and the auxiliary plane.
We design a novel auxiliary plane module by combining physical assumptions and neural networks to generate the auxiliary plane appearance. Extensive experiments on syn-thetic and real-world datasets demonstrate that NeuS-HSR outperforms state-of-the-art approaches for accurate and robust target surface reconstruction against HSR. Code is available at https://github.com/JiaxiongQ/
NeuS-HSR. 1.

Introduction
Reconstructing 3D object surfaces from multi-view im-ages is a challenging task in computer vision and graph-ics. Recently, NeuS [45] combines the surface render-ing [3, 12, 35, 52] and volume rendering [8, 29], for recon-structing objects with thin structures and achieves good per-formance on the input with slight specular reflections. How-ever, when processing the scenes under high specular reflec-tions (HSR), NeuS fails to recover the target object surfaces, as shown in the second row of Fig. 1. High specular reflec-tions are ubiquitous when we use a camera to capture the target object through glasses. As shown in the first row of
Fig. 1, in the captured views with HSR, we can recognize the virtual image in front of the target object. The virtual
*Bo Ren is the corresponding author.
Figure 1. 3D object surface reconstruction under high specular reflections (HSR). Top: A real-world scene captured by a mobile phone. Middle: The state-of-the-art method NeuS [45] fails to re-construct the target object (i.e., the Buddha). Bottom: We propose
NeuS-HSR, which recovers a more accurate target object surface than NeuS. image introduces the photometric variation on the object surface visually, which degrades the multi-view consistency and encodes extreme ambiguities for rendering, then con-fuses NeuS to reconstruct the reflected objects instead of the target object.
To adapt to the HSR scenes, one intuitive solution is firstly applying reflection removal methods to reduce HSR, then reconstructing the target object with the enhanced tar-get object appearance as the supervision. However, most recent single-image reflection removal works [4, 9, 23, 24, 26, 40] need the ground-truth background or reflection as supervision, which is hard to be acquired. Furthermore, for these reflection removal methods, testing scenes should be present in the training sets, which limits their generaliza-tion. These facts demonstrate that explicitly using the re-flection removal methods to enhance the target object ap-pearance is impractical. A recent unsupervised reflection removal approach, NeRFReN [18] decomposes the ren-dered image into reflected and transmitted parts by implicit representations. However, it is limited by constrained view directions and simple planar reflectors. When we apply it to scenes for multi-view reconstruction, as Fig. 3 presents, it takes the target object as the content in the reflected image
Figure 2. NeuS-HSR. High specular reflections (HSR) make NeuS tend to reconstruct the reflected object in HSR. NeuS-HSR phys-ically decomposes the rendered image into the target object and auxiliary plane parts, which encourages NeuS to focus on the tar-get object. and fails to generate the correct transmitted image for target object recovery.
The two-stage intuitive solution struggles in our task as discussed above. To tackle this issue, we consider a more effective decomposition strategy than NeRFReN, to enhance the target object appearance for accurate surface reconstruction in one stage. To achieve our goal, we con-struct the following assumptions:
Assumption 1 A scene that suffers from HSR can be de-composed into the target object and planar reflector com-ponents. Except for the target object, HSR and most other contents in a view are reflected and transmitted through the planar reflectors (i.e., glasses).
Assumption 2 Planar reflectors intersect with the camera view direction since all view direction vectors generally point to the target object and pass through planar reflec-tors.
Based on the above physical assumptions, we propose
NeuS-HSR, a novel object reconstruction framework to re-cover the target object surface against HSR from a set of
RGB images. For Assumption 1, as Fig. 2 shows, we de-sign an auxiliary plane to represent the planar reflector since we aim to enhance the target object appearance through it.
With the aid of the auxiliary plane, we faithfully separate the target object and auxiliary plane parts from the super-vision. For the target object part, we follow NeuS [45] to generate the target object appearance. For the auxiliary plane part, we design an auxiliary plane module with the view direction as the input for Assumption 2, by utilizing neural networks to generate attributes (including the nor-mal and position) of the view-dependent auxiliary plane.
When the auxiliary plane is determined, we acquire the aux-iliary plane appearance based on the reflection transforma-tion [16] and neural networks. Finally, we add two appear-ances and then obtain the rendered image, which is super-vised by the captured image for one-stage training.
We conduct a series of experiments to evaluate NeuS-HSR. The experiments demonstrate that NeuS-HSR is su-perior to other state-of-the-art methods on the synthetic dataset and recovers high-quality target objects from HSR-effect images in real-world scenes.
Figure 3. Decomposition of NeRFReN [18]. NeRFReN fails to separate specular reflections and the target object appearance in this view, then makes NeuS fail to recover the target object surface.
To summarize, our main contributions are as follows:
• We propose to recover the target object surface, which suffers from HSR, by separating the target object and aux-iliary plane parts of the scene.
• We design an auxiliary plane module to generate the ap-pearance of the auxiliary plane part physically to enhance the appearance of the target object part.
• Extensive experiments on synthetic and real-world scenes demonstrate that our method reconstructs more accurate target objects than other state-of-the-art methods quanti-tatively and qualitatively. 2.