Abstract
Deep Implicit Function (DIF) has gained much popu-larity as an efﬁcient 3D shape representation. To capture geometry details, current mainstream methods divide 3D shapes into local regions and then learn each one with a local latent code via a decoder. Such local methods can capture more local details due to less diversity among local regions than global shapes. Although the diversity of local regions has been decreased compared to global approaches, the diversity in different local regions still poses a challenge in learning an implicit function when treating all regions equally using only a single decoder. What is worse, these local regions often exhibit imbalanced distributions, where certain regions have signiﬁcantly fewer observations. This leads that ﬁne geometry details could not be preserved well.
To solve this problem, we propose a novel Local Pattern-speciﬁc Implicit Function, named LP-DIF, to represent a shape with clusters of local regions and multiple decoders, where each decoder only focuses on one cluster of local re-gions which share a certain pattern. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst extract local codes for all regions, and then cluster them into multiple groups in the latent space, where similar re-gions sharing a common pattern fall into one group. After that, we train multiple decoders for mining local patterns of different groups, which simpliﬁes the learning of ﬁne geo-metric details by reducing the diversity of local regions seen by each decoder. To further alleviate the data-imbalance problem, we introduce a region re-weighting module to each pattern-speciﬁc decoder using a kernel density estima-tor, which dynamically re-weights the regions during learn-*The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu. This work was supported by National Key R&D Program of China (2022YFC3800600), the Na-tional Natural Science Foundation of China (62272263, 62072268), and in part by Tsinghua-Kuaishou Institute of Future Media Data. ing. Our LP-DIF can restore more geometry details, and thus improve the quality of 3D reconstruction. Experiments demonstrate that our method can achieve the state-of-the-art performance over previous methods. Code is available at https://github.com/gtyxyz/lpdif. 1.

Introduction
Representing 3D shapes is a fundamental problem for many applications in 3D computer vision. Recently, Deep
Implicit Function (DIF) [4,22,23,25,28,41] has gained pop-ularity for efﬁciently learning the representation of 3D ob-jects and scenes. In contrast to directly learning explicit 3D representations [15,30,31] (voxels, point clouds or meshes),
DIF aims to train a neural network to learn the binary occu-pancy function [25] or signed distance function (SDF) [28], as given a query location and an input latent code. Such kind of representation is continuous with arbitrary precision and can handle various topology, which has achieved the state-of-the-art results in several shape reconstruction tasks.
Existing DIF methods can be roughly classiﬁed into two categories: global and local approaches. Most of the early methods [4, 9, 20, 21, 25, 27–29, 35, 37, 40] fall into global approaches. These methods take advantage of one latent code and a single decoder to represent the whole shape.
Global approaches often suffer from long training time and low reconstruction accuracy due to the limited capacity of capturing local geometry details. More recently, local ap-proaches [1,3,5,6,10–12,17,19,34,36,38] divide 3D shapes (often divide by 3D grids) into local regions and then learn each one with a local latent code via a decoder, where the decoder shares the geometric similarities among different local regions. Although such local approaches can capture some local details, a large diversity of different local regions still increase the difﬁculty of learning an implicit function
(a) Global DIF (b) Local DIF (c) Ours (d) Reference
Figure 1. Visual comparison of 3D shape surface reconstruction. Compared with global DIF (e.g. [28]) and local DIF (e.g. [1]), our method can reconstruct the shape with ﬁne-grained geometric details. Compared with previous methods that treat all local regions equally using a single decoder, we regard a shape as clusters of local regions and mine local patterns with different decoders. This alleviates the difﬁculty of learning caused by diverse local regions. when treating all regions equally using only a single de-coder. In addition, these local regions often exhibit imbal-anced distributions, where certain regions have signiﬁcantly fewer observations, especially in scenes. As a result, ﬁne geometry details of shapes could not be captured well.
To address the above-mentioned problems, we propose a novel Local Pattern-speciﬁc Implicit Function, named LP-DIF, for learning 3D shape representation using clusters of local regions with multiple decoders, where each decoder only represents one cluster of local regions which share a certain pattern (geometric features such as facing direction, number of faces, relative positions to the region center).
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst extract the local latent codes for all local regions divided by 3D grids, and then cluster them into multiple groups in the latent space, where similar re-gions sharing a common pattern fall into one group. After that, we train a separate pattern-speciﬁc decoder for each group of regions, which reduces data-imbalance among dif-ferent patterns of regions and simpliﬁes the learning of ﬁne geometric details of 3D structures by limiting the diver-sity of regions seen to each decoder. To further alleviate the region-imbalance problem, we introduce a region re-weighting module to each pattern-speciﬁc decoder by ker-nel density estimator, which dynamically re-weights the re-gions during learning. Our main contributions can be sum-marized as follows.
• We propose a novel LP-DIF to learn local pattern-speciﬁc deep implicit function of 3D shapes for re-constructing highly detailed geometry. Compared with previous methods that treat all local regions equally us-ing a single decoder, we regard a shape as clusters of local regions and mine local patterns with different de-coders. This alleviates the difﬁculty of learning caused by diverse local regions.
• We introduce a dynamic region re-weighting module, which could provide more focus on less common re-gions to tackle the data-imbalance problem in each pat-tern decoder. As a result, the regions with less appear-ances can be captured more accurately.
• Our method could be applied in multiple objects, sin-gle complex objects and large scale of scenes. We improve the state-of-the-art accuracy in surface recon-struction under various benchmarks.
Figure 2 illustrates the main differences between DIF, local DIF and our method. For DIF approaches, one global code and a decoder are used for the whole shape. For Lo-cal DIF methods, multiple local codes and a shared decoder are used. For our method, multiple clusters of regions are learned with different decoders. 2.