Abstract
Document layout analysis is a crucial prerequisite for document understanding, including document retrieval and conversion. Most public datasets currently contain only
PDF documents and lack realistic documents. Mod-els trained on these datasets may not generalize well to real-world scenarios. Therefore, this paper introduces a large and diverse document layout analysis dataset called
M 6Doc. The M 6 designation represents six properties: (1) Multi-Format (including scanned, photographed, and
PDF documents); (2) Multi-Type (such as scientific arti-cles, textbooks, books, test papers, magazines, newspa-pers, and notes); (3) Multi-Layout (rectangular, Manhattan, non-Manhattan, and multi-column Manhattan); (4) Multi-Language (Chinese and English); (5) Multi-Annotation
Category (74 types of annotation labels with 237,116 an-notation instances in 9,080 manually annotated pages); and (6) Modern documents. Additionally, we propose a transformer-based document layout analysis method called
TransDLANet, which leverages an adaptive element match-ing mechanism that enables query embedding to better match ground truth to improve recall, and constructs a segmentation branch for more precise document image in-stance segmentation. We conduct a comprehensive evalua-tion of M 6Doc with various layout analysis methods and demonstrate its effectiveness. TransDLANet achieves state-of-the-art performance on M 6Doc with 64.5% mAP. The
M 6Doc dataset will be available at https://github. com/HCIILAB/M6Doc.
*Corresponding Author. 1
Figure 1. Examples of complex page layouts across different doc-ument formats, types, layouts, languages. 1.

Introduction
Document layout analysis (DLA) is a fundamental pre-processing task for modern document understanding and
digitization, which has recently received increasing atten-tion [25]. DLA can be classified into physical layout anal-ysis and logical layout analysis [15]. Physical layout anal-ysis considers the visual presentation of the document and distinguishes regions with different elements such as text, image, and table. Logical layout analysis distinguishes the semantic structures of documents according to the mean-ing and assigns them to different categories, such as chapter heading, section heading, paragraph, and figure note.
Currently, deep learning methods have dominated DLA, which require a plethora of training data. Some datasets have been proposed in the community to promote the de-velopment of DLA, as shown in Table 1. However, these datasets have several limitations. (1) Small size. Early
DLA datasets, such as PRImA [1] and DSSE200 [41], were small-scale and contained only hundreds of images. (2)
Limited document format. The formats of current public large-scale datasets such as PubLayNet [44], DocBank [17], and DocLayNet [29], are all PDF documents. It presents a huge challenge to evaluate the effectiveness of different methods in realistic scenarios. (3) Limited document diver-sity. Most datasets include only scientific articles, which are typeset using uniform templates and severely lack vari-ability. Although DocLayNet [41] considers documents of seven types, they are not commonly used. The lack of style diversity would prejudice the development of multi-domain general layout analysis. (4) Limited document languages.
Most datasets’ language is English. Since the text features of documents in different languages are fundamentally dif-ferent, DLA methods may encounter domain shift problems in different languages, which remain unexplored. (5) Few annotation categories. The annotation categories of current datasets are not sufficiently fine-grained, preventing more granular layout information extraction.
To promote the development of fine-grained logical
DLA in realistic scenarios, we have built the Multi-Format, Multi-Type, Multi-Layout, Multi-Language, and
Multi-Annotation Categories Modern document (M 6Doc) dataset. M 6Doc possesses several advantages. Firstly,
M 6Doc considers three document formats (scanned, pho-tographed, and PDF) and seven representative docu-types (scientific articles, magazines, newspapers, ment etc.). Since scanned/photographed documents are com-monly seen and widely used, the proposed M 6Doc dataset presents great diversity and closely mirrors real-world sce-narios. Secondly, M 6Doc contains 74 document annotation categories, which are the most abundant and fine-grained up to date. Thirdly, M 6Doc is the most detailed manu-ally annotated DLA dataset, as it contains 237,116 anno-tation instances in 9,080 pages. Finally, M 6Doc includes four layouts (rectangular, Manhattan, non-Manhattan, and multi-column Manhattan) and two languages (Chinese and
English), covering more comprehensive layout scenarios.
Several examples of the M 6Doc dataset are shown in Fig-ure 1.
In addition, we propose a transformer-based model,
TransDLANet, to perform layout extraction in an instance
It adopts a standard segmentation manner effectively.
Transformer encoder without positional encoding as a fea-ture fusion method and uses an adaptive element matching mechanism to enable the query vector to better focus on the unique features of layout elements. This helps understand the spatial and global interdependencies of distinct layout elements and also reduces duplicate attention on the same instance. Subsequently, a dynamic decoder is exploited to perform the fusion of RoI features and image features. Fi-nally, it uses three parameter-shared multi-layer perception (MLP) branches to decode the fused interaction features for multi-task learning.
The contributions of this paper are summarized as fol-lows:
• M 6Doc is the first layout analysis dataset that contains both real-world (photographed and scanned) files and born-digital files. Additionally, it is the first dataset that includes Chinese examples. It has several repre-sentative document types and layouts, facilitating the development of generic layout analysis methods.
• M 6Doc is the most fine-grained logical layout analy-sis categories. It can serve as a benchmark for several related tasks, such as logical layout analysis, formula recognition, and table analysis.
• We propose the TransDLANet, a Transformer-based
It includes a method for document layout analysis.
Transformer-like encoder to better capture the corre-lation between queries, a dynamic interaction decoder, and three multi-ayer perceptron branches with shared parameters to decode the fused interaction features for multi-task learning. 2.