Abstraction from Signed Distance Function
Weixiao Liu1,2 Yuwei Wu1
Sipu Ruan1 Gregory S. Chirikjian1* 1National University of Singapore 2Johns Hopkins University
{mpewxl, yw.wu, ruansp, mpegre}@nus.edu.sg
Abstract
Representing complex objects with basic geometric primitives has long been a topic in computer vision.
Primitive-based representations have the merits of com-pactness and computational efficiency in higher-level tasks such as physics simulation, collision checking, and robotic manipulation. Unlike previous works which extract polyg-onal meshes from a signed distance function (SDF), in this paper, we present a novel method, named Marching-Primitives, to obtain a primitive-based abstraction directly from an SDF. Our method grows geometric primitives (such as superquadrics) iteratively by analyzing the connectivity of voxels while marching at different levels of signed dis-tance. For each valid connected volume of interest, we march on the scope of voxels from which a primitive is able to be extracted in a probabilistic sense and simulta-neously solve for the parameters of the primitive to cap-ture the underlying local geometry. We evaluate the per-formance of our method on both synthetic and real-world datasets. The results show that the proposed method out-performs the state-of-the-art in terms of accuracy, and is di-rectly generalizable among different categories and scales.
The code is open-sourced at https://github.com/
ChirikjianLab/Marching-Primitives.git. 1.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed great progress in the areas of 3D shape representation and environmental perception.
Low-level representations such as surface meshes, point clouds, and occupancy grids are widely used as inputs to high-level computer vision algorithms and artificial intel-ligence tasks. They have the advantage of being able to represent and visualize objects with high accuracy and rich local geometric features. However, the low-level represen-tations are ineffective in delivering a general and intuitive sense of structural geometry as well as part-level scene un-derstanding. Studies [3, 20] show that human vision, unlike
*Corresponding author
Figure 1. Primitive-base representation versus mesh. For each pair of objects, the left one is the superquadric abstraction obtained by our algorithm, and the right one is the original mesh. The mesh of the chair is 6MB in size, while our representation only needs 4KB. An SDF representation discretized on a 1283 voxel grid oc-cupies 19MB. Our abstraction is equivalent to an implicit continu-ous SDF, which is an approximation to the discrete SDF. computer vision, tends to perceive and understand scenes as combinations of simple primitive shapes. Human beings perform well and robustly in complex tasks, providing a basic geometric description of the scene is available [32].
Therefore, researchers turn to exploring the possibility of interpreting complex objects and scenes with basic geo-metric primitives. Taking advantage of the primitive-based representation, many higher-level tasks, such as segmenta-tion [14, 16, 21, 30], scene understanding [29, 31, 41, 47], grasping [33, 44, 45] and motion planning [35, 36], are able to be solved efficiently.
However, it still remains challenging to extract primitive-based abstractions from low-level representations. Start-ing from the 1990s, Solina et al. [1, 17, 39] aim to extract a single superquadric representation from a simple object by minimizing the least-square error between the primitive and the measured points. Later in [7, 22], their method is extended to represent more complex objects with multiple primitives. More recently, the authors of [24, 47] reformu-late the task as a probabilistic inference problem with en-hanced accuracy and robustness to noise and outliers. At the same time, with the surge of data-driven techniques, re-searchers attempt to train neural networks to infer cuboids
[27,38,41,48,50] and superquadrics [29,31] representations in an end-to-end fashion. However, both the computational and learning-based approaches have their own limitations.
The computational methods are vulnerable to the inherent ambiguity of the point-to-surface relationship. For exam-ple, the algorithms tend to fill empty spaces of a non-convex object with primitives by mistake, due to the inside/outside ambiguity of a surface depicted by a set of points [24, 48].
The main drawback of the learning approaches lies in the lack of generalizability beyond the object category on which the model is trained [24,31,47,48]. Also, the shape abstrac-tion accuracy is inferior to the computational methods.
The signed distance function (SDF) has been a success-ful 3D volumetric representation in varieties of computer vi-sion and graphics tasks. It is the basic framework for many classic 3D reconstruction algorithms such as TSDF volume reconstruction [10, 15], KinectFusion [19], and Dynamic-Fusion [26]. Recently, the SDF representation is adapted to the deep learning frameworks, and exhibits boosted poten-tials in shape encoding [8, 18, 28, 43], surface reconstruc-tion [23, 46], and shape completion [11, 12, 34]. Usually, triangular mesh surfaces are extracted from the SDF rep-resentation with the marching cubes algorithm [25]. Point cloud and occupancy grid representations are also obtained by keeping the vertices of the meshes and the sign of each voxel point, respectively. The SDF is among the most in-formative 3D representations since it encodes not only the surface geometry but also the distance and side of a point relative to the shape. Meanwhile, it is easily achievable via range images from 3D sensors [10], or learnable from other input modalities [8, 18, 28]. Since we are able to extract meshes from an SDF, it is natural to think about the pos-sibility of extracting primitives as well. Furthermore, the primitive-based abstraction is a continuous interpretation of the complete geometric information encoded in the original discrete SDF, but requires much less storage size (Fig.1).
Motivated by the aforementioned facts and the bottle-neck of the current shape abstraction algorithms, we pro-posed a general shape abstraction method by reasoning di-rectly on the informative SDF representation. The goal of our method is to find a combination of geometric primi-tives whose underlying SDF values match the target values evaluated on the evenly spaced discrete grid points (Sec. 3.1 and Sec. 3.2). To solve this problem, we propose a two-step iterative algorithm called the Marching-Primitives.
Our algorithm ‘marches’ on two domains: the signed dis-tance domain and the voxelized space domain, alternately.
Firstly, the connectivity of volumes are analyzed by gen-erating isosurfaces on a sequence of decreasing levels of negative signed distances (Sec.3.3). By doing so, volumes of interest (VOIs) where primitives are likely to be encoded can be identified sequentially. In the second step, for each of the VOIs, our algorithm marches on the neighbouring vox-els to infer their probabilistic correspondences to the primi-tive and simultaneously optimizes the shape and pose of the primitive (Sec.3.4). After the primitive representation of a
VOI is achieved, the fitted volumes are deactivated from the voxel grid. Our algorithm continues marching on the signed distance domain until it approaches zero, i.e., all the inte-rior volumes of the SDF have been captured by the recov-ered primitives. We compare our algorithm with the state-of-the-art of both the computational and learning-based ap-proaches on the ShapeNet object dataset [6] and D-FAUST human shape dataset [4] (Sec. 4.1). We also study the per-formance of our algorithm on different conditions(Sec. 4.2).
Finally, we demonstrate the scene abstraction result of the
Stanford Reading Room [49], which contains several pieces of furniture of various categories(Sec. 4.3). 2.