Abstract
Semi-supervised learning is a promising method for medical image segmentation under limited annotation.
However, the model cognitive bias impairs the segmentation performance, especially for edge regions. Furthermore, current mainstream semi-supervised medical image seg-mentation (SSMIS) methods lack designs to handle model bias. The neural network has a strong learning ability, but the cognitive bias will gradually deepen during the training, and it is difﬁcult to correct itself. We propose a novel mutual correction framework (MCF) to explore network bias correction and improve the performance of
SSMIS. Inspired by the plain contrast idea, MCF intro-duces two different subnets to explore and utilize the dis-crepancies between subnets to correct cognitive bias of the model. More concretely, a contrastive difference review (CDR) module is proposed to ﬁnd out inconsistent pre-diction regions and perform a review training. Addition-ally, a dynamic competitive pseudo-label generation (DC-PLG) module is proposed to evaluate the performance of subnets in real-time, dynamically selecting more reliable pseudo-labels. Experimental results on two medical im-age databases with different modalities (CT and MRI) show that our method achieves superior performance compared to several state-of-the-art methods. The code will be avail-able at https://github.com/WYC-321/MCF. 1.

Introduction especially for medical
Making pixel-level annotation is difﬁcult and time-Semi-consuming, supervised learning is a promising approach for processing images with limited supervised data [2, 3, 14, 17, 23, 30, 31].
In recent years, semi-supervised methods based on consis-tency regularization [21, 27] have attracted the attention of researchers and are one of the mainstream techniques, es-images.
∗Corresponding author
Figure 1. A brief description of the process of MT-like methods (a) and our proposed MCF (b). (c) Biased prediction of MT and
MCF during training, MCF reduces more biased predictions. (d)
The red masks represent the model’s wrong predictions, and the white numbers represent the number of wrong pixels. pecially in SSMIS. These methods usually include two sub-nets, and the general process is to add random perturbations to the same samples and force the subnets to produce con-sistent prediction results for these perturbed inputs. Mean
Teacher (MT) [22] is a typical method among them and in-spired a series of SSMIS work [13, 33]. Although these methods have achieved promising results, they ignore the impact of cognitive biases in the model. Cognitive bias is the phenomenon in which the model persists in mispre-dictions, caused by overﬁtting to wrong supervision sig-nals [12]. There is evidence that cognitive biases reduce the performance of consistency-regularization-based meth-ods [1].
We take MT-like methods as an example to analyze this issue. As shown Fig. 1 (a) the methods based on the MT (1) The model consists framework have three features:
of teacher and student networks with a shared structure. (2) The student network parameters θ are updated through stochastic gradient descent, while the teacher network pa-rameters θ(cid:48) are updated from the student network using Ex-ponential Moving Average (EMA) as Eq. (1):
θ(cid:48) = αθ(cid:48) + (1 − α)θ (1) where α is the EMA decay that controls the updating rate. (3) Consistency regularization is implemented to encourage subnets to produce consistent predictions. Characteristics (1) and (2) naturally give the model a tendency to output consistent predictions. And explicit consistency constraints provide a supervised signal for unlabeled data. Therefore, the above three features make model training simpler and accelerate model convergence.
However, there are also three limitations hidden in it: (1) Structural sharing among subnets reduces model vari-ability. (2) Due to the parameter update method of EMA, the teacher network is a weighted mixture of the historical states of the student network. Therefore, the performance of the teacher network is constrained by the student network. (3) Consistency regularization can also be regarded as a la-beling strategy that subnets to generate pseudo-labels for each other. The quality of the pseudo-labels greatly affects the performance of the model. Combining limitations (1) and (2), since the pseudo-labels come from a mixture of his-torical states with the same architecture as the student net-work, the consistency-based pseudo-label generation meth-ods are more prone to trap the network in cognitive biases and difﬁcult to correct for mispredictions. In addition, these limitations make the model waste the potential of the multi-subnet architecture.
To further demonstrate the cognitive bias of the model, we test MT and our proposed MCF every 15 iterations and record the number of erroneous pixels, as shown in Fig. 1 (c). It can be seen that as the training progresses, although the number of bias/wrong pixels continues to decrease, the model overﬁts some bias predictions that are difﬁcult to cor-rect on its own. The visualization result is shown in Fig. 1 (d). The red mask shows the model’s bias predictions, and the white number shows the number of bias pixels. These bias pixels are mainly located in the target edge region, thus reducing the biased prediction is beneﬁcial to improve the accuracy of edge segmentation. Finally compared with MT,
MCF reduces more biased predictions under the same train-ing steps.
In summary, our goal is to ﬁnd a mechanism for the net-work to be aware of cognitive biases and correct them. To this end, we propose a mutual correction framework in the semi-supervised medical image segmentation for the explo-ration of model bias correction. We think that while the network is highly capable of learning, it is difﬁcult to cor-Inspired by the idea of contrast, rect biases on its own.
MCF consists of two distinct structural subnets with in-dependent parameter updates, which learn to correct each other through a strong inter-subnet interaction. Speciﬁcally,
MCF proposes contrastive difference review (CDR) and dy-namic competitive pseudo-label generation (DCPLG) for labeled and unlabeled data training, respectively. The CDR takes prediction discrepancies of subnets as potential bias areas and guiding the subnets to correct them. Furthermore, we observe that one of the differences between the medical image segmentation databases and natural image databases is that all medical images are related to the target object.
Therefore, it is reasonable to evaluate the performance of the subnets on a small amount of labeled data. Based on this, unlike MT-like methods [14, 23], MCF does not bind teacher or student roles to ﬁxed subnets, but instead pro-poses DCPLG to dynamically evaluate and select pseudo-label generation networks for more reliable label propaga-tion. The main contributions of this work are as follows:
• We explore the problem of model bias correction and propose a new framework MCF for semi-supervised medical image segmentation.
• A CDR module is proposed to guide the network to pay attention and correct its own potential bias.
• Combined with the characteristics of medical image segmentation databases, DCPLG is proposed to obtain more reliable pseudo-labels.
We evaluate the proposed MCF framework on semi-supervised medical image segmentation with both CT and
MRI modalities. Experiments verify the effectiveness of this framework, showing that MCF outperforms the SOTA method, especially in edge segmentation accuracy. 2.