Abstract
The main challenge in vision-and-language navigation (VLN) is how to understand natural-language instructions in an unseen environment. The main limitation of conven-tional VLN algorithms is that if an action is mistaken, the agent fails to follow the instructions or explores unneces-sary regions, leading the agent to an irrecoverable path. To tackle this problem, we propose Meta-Explore, a hierarchi-cal navigation method deploying an exploitation policy to correct misled recent actions. We show that an exploitation policy, which moves the agent toward a well-chosen local goal among unvisited but observable states, outperforms a method which moves the agent to a previously visited state.
We also highlight the demand for imagining regretful explo-rations with semantically meaningful clues. The key to our approach is understanding the object placements around the agent in spectral-domain. Speciﬁcally, we present a novel visual representation, called scene object spectrum (SOS), which performs category-wise 2D Fourier transform of de-tected objects. Combining exploitation policy and SOS fea-tures, the agent can correct its path by choosing a promis-ing local goal. We evaluate our method in three VLN bench-marks: R2R, SOON, and REVERIE. Meta-Explore outper-forms other baselines and shows signiﬁcant generalization performance. In addition, local goal search using the pro-posed spectral-domain SOS features signiﬁcantly improves the success rate by 17.1% and SPL by 20.6% against the state-of-the-art method of the SOON benchmark. Project page: https://rllab-snu.github.io/projects/Meta-Explore/doc.html 1.

Introduction
Visual navigation in indoor environments has been stud-ied widely and shown that an agent can navigate in unex-This work was in part supported by Institute of Information & Communica-tions Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea govern-ment (MSIT) (No. 2019-0-01190, [SW Star Lab] Robot Learning: Efﬁcient, Safe, and Socially-Acceptable Machine Learning, 80%, and No.2022-0-00907, Develop-ment of AI Bots Collaboration Platform and Self-Organizing AI, 20%). (Corre-sponding authors: Yoonseon Oh and Songhwai Oh.) g global goal l local goal start
Instruction: "Walk forward, keeping the long table to  the left. Exit the room via the white door to the left of  the stairs. Descend a narrow circular stairwell and  wait, facing two windows with circular stained glass  in their centers." (cid:2197)(cid:2782) unvisited, observable node (cid:1872)(cid:3047)(cid:3035) visited node t
Figure 1. Hierarchical Exploration. At each episode, a natural-language instruction is given to the agent to navigate to a goal lo-cation. The agent explores the environment and constructs a topo-and next step reachable logical map by recording visited nodes nodes . Each node consists of the position of the agent and visual features. ot denotes the observation at time t. The agent chooses an unvisited local goal to solve the regretful exploration problem. plored environments [1]. By recognizing the visual context and constructing a map, an agent can explore the environ-ment and solve tasks such as moving towards a goal or fol-lowing a desired trajectory. With the increasing development in human language understanding, vision-and-language nav-igation (VLN) [2] has enabled robots to communicate with humans using natural languages. The high degree of free-dom in natural language instructions allows VLN to expand to various tasks, including (1) following ﬁne-grained step-by-step instructions [2–13] and (2) reaching a target location described by goal-oriented language instructions [14–20].
A challenging issue in VLN is the case when an action is mistaken with respect to the given language instruction
[21–26]. For instance, if the agent is asked to turn right at the end of the hallway but turns left, the agent may end up in ir-recoverable paths. Several existing studies solve this issue via hierarchical exploration, where the high-level planner decides when to explore and the low-level planner chooses
If the high-level planner chooses to what actions to take. explore, the agent searches unexplored regions, and if it chooses to exploit, the agent executes the best action based on the previous exploration. Prior work [21–23] returns the agent to the last successful state and resumes exploration.
However, such methods take a heuristic approach because the agent only backtracks to a recently visited location. The agent does not take advantage of the constructed map and instead naively uses its recent trajectory for backtracking.
Another recent work [26] suggests graph-based exploitation, which uses a topological map to expand the action space in global planning. Still, this method assumes that the agent can directly jump to a previously visited node. Since this method can perform a jump action at every timestep, there is no trig-ger that explicitly decides when to explore and when to ex-ploit. Therefore, we address the importance of time schedul-ing for exploration-exploitation and efﬁcient global planning using a topological map to avoid reexploring visited regions.
We expand the notion of hierarchical exploration by proposing Meta-Explore, which not only allows the high-level planner to choose when to correct misled local move-ments but also ﬁnds an unvisited state inferred to be close to the global goal. We illustrate the overview of hierarchi-cal exploration in Figure 1.
Instead of backtracking, we present an exploitation method called local goal search. We show that it is more efﬁcient to plan a path to a local goal, which is the most promising node from the unvisited but reachable nodes. We illustrate the difference between con-ventional backtracking and local goal search in Figure 2.
Based on our method, we show that exploration and ex-ploitation are not independent and can complement each other: (1) to overtake regretful explorations, the agent can perform exploitation and (2) the agent can utilize the con-structed topological map for local goal search. We also highlight the demand for imagining regretful explorations with semantically meaningful clues. Most VLN tasks re-quire a level of understanding objects nearby the agent, but previous studies simply encode observed panoramic or ob-ject images [2, 3, 16–18, 21–35]. In this paper, we present a novel semantic representation of the scene called scene object spectrum (SOS), which is a matrix containing the ar-rangements and frequencies of objects from the visual ob-servation at each location. Using SOS features, we can suf-ﬁciently estimate the context of the environment. We show that the proposed spectral-domain SOS features manifest better linguistic interpretability than conventional spatial-domain visual features. Combining exploitation policy and
SOS features, we design a navigation score that measures the alignment between a given language instruction and a corrected trajectory toward a local goal. The agent com-pares local goal candidates and selects a near-optimal can-didate with the highest navigation score from corrected tra-jectories. This involves high-level reasoning related to the landmarks (e.g., bedroom and kitchen) and objects (e.g., ta-ble and window) that appear in the instructions.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We propose a hierarchical navigation method called
Meta-Explore, deploying an exploitation policy to cor-visited node unvisited node global goal local goal start current position searchable areaarea
<
“Which visited node”
“Which unvisited node”
“is the most likely to be a local goal?”
Figure 2. Local Goal Search for Exploitation. The local goal is likely to be chosen as the closest node to the global goal. Existing methods only backtrack to a visited node (left). We expand the searchable area by including unvisited but reachable nodes (right). rect misled recent actions. The agent searches for an appropriate local goal instead of reversing the recent action sequence.
• In the exploitation mode, the agent uses a novel scene representation called scene object spectrum (SOS), which contains the spectral information of the object placements in the scene. SOS features provide seman-tically meaningful clues to choose a near-optimal local goal and help the agent to solve the regretful explo-ration problem.
• We evaluate our method on three VLN benchmarks:
R2R [2], SOON [16], and REVERIE [17]. The exper-imental results show that the proposed method, Meta-Explore, improves the success rate and SPL in test splits of R2R, SOON and val split of REVERIE. The proposed method shows better generalization results compared to all baselines. 2.