Abstract
Creativity is an indispensable part of human cognition and also an inherent part of how we make sense of the world. Metaphorical abstraction is fundamental in commu-nicating creative ideas through nuanced relationships be-tween abstract concepts such as feelings. While computer vision benchmarks and approaches predominantly focus on understanding and generating literal interpretations of im-ages, metaphorical comprehension of images remains rel-atively unexplored. Towards this goal, we introduce Meta-CLUE, a set of vision tasks on visual metaphor. We also collect high-quality and rich metaphor annotations (ab-*Equal Contribution stract objects, concepts, relationships along with their cor-responding object boxes) as there do not exist any datasets that facilitate the evaluation of these tasks. We perform a comprehensive analysis of state-of-the-art models in vi-sion and language based on our annotations, highlight-ing strengths and weaknesses of current approaches in vi-sual metaphor classiﬁcation, localization, understanding (retrieval, question answering, captioning) and generation (text-to-image synthesis) tasks. We hope this work pro-vides a concrete step towards developing AI systems with human-like creative capabilities. Project page: https:
//metaclue.github.io
1.

Introduction
“Metaphor is pervasive in everyday life ... Our ordinary conceptual system, in terms of which we both think and act, is fundamentally metaphorical in nature.” — Lakoff & Johnson [25]
Creativity is a process of generating a new perspective on a problem or a situation. Metaphorical thinking has been recognized as a key and powerful mechanism of creativ-ity [24, 29, 50]. Humans engage metaphors in their creative thinking process as strategies to link or blend concepts, or to view a concept from a target domain in terms of another, apparently dissimilar concept from a source domain [25].
Metaphors also provide a sophisticated tool for nuanced hu-man communication. Let us take a closer look at the struc-ture of metaphors – and especially visual metaphors.
Metaphors1 are a cognitive construct in which a concept is compared to a seemingly unrelated concept via some shared attribute. Take as an example ‘This car is a chee-tah’, where ‘This car’ is compared to ‘a cheetah’ in terms of speed. Metaphors have a simple syntactic structure of
‘A is B’ where A is referred to as the primary concept and B as the secondary concept. The implied analogy in a metaphor is of the form: ‘(primary concept) is as (rela-tionship)2 as (secondary concept)’ and often involves an at-tribute transfer from the secondary to the primary concept.
Some examples include ‘This phone is as fast as a rocket’,
‘Cigarettes are as harmful as bullets’ etc. The primary and secondary concepts are usually unrelated at a glance, re-sulting in an element of surprise and creativity in metaphor-ical expressions. Despite following such simple structure, metaphors are quite powerful in conveying creative ideas.
Metaphors are pervasive in all forms of communication, such as speech, text, visual etc.
Visual Metaphors are images where the primary and sec-ondary concepts are visually depicted in an image con-veying the metaphorical message to the viewers. Visual metaphors are widely used in mass media communications like advertising and journalism [15, 43, 45]. In this work, we work with Ad images, as metaphors tend to be prevalent in ads. There are numerous ways a metaphor can be repre-sented visually. Following the classiﬁcation in [15], there are at least 4 different types of visual metaphors. Fig. 2 shows sample images that belong to these types along with our annotations of primary, secondary concepts and their relationship. In contextual metaphors, either the primary or secondary concept is not explicitly visible, but is inferred from the context (e.g., apple in the left-most image).
In hybrid metaphors, the primary and secondary concepts are 1Grammarians distinguish a metaphor “A is B” from a simile “A is like
B”. In our work we use “metaphor” to encompass both variants. 2We use the word ‘relationship’ to denote the shared property of pri-mary and secondary concepts, usually adjectives or adjectival phrases. visually conﬂated. Juxtaposition forms one of the simplest visual metaphor types, where the two concepts are just pre-sented next to each other. Multimodal metaphors represent one of the concepts with another modality, such as text or
In practice, visual metaphors use multiple of these logo. strategies to convey a metaphor in an effective manner. In many cases, the implied metaphorical meaning is somewhat open-ended. Interpretation of visual metaphors depends on several external factors, such as familiarity with the brands and cultural context.
These visual variations and nuances make automatic cognition or generation of visual metaphors highly chal-lenging. While the last decade has seen rapid progress in many areas of understanding and generation tasks, prior works in computer vision focus heavily on literal interpreta-tion of images and overlook the importance of metaphorical reasoning in understanding the image message [1, 48]. We believe that developing AI systems with metaphorical com-prehension and generation capabilities can greatly assist hu-mans in creative endeavors involving conveying concepts in new and exciting ways. Such systems provide an important step towards conferring human-like creativity to AI models.
To this end, we introduce multiple interesting tasks and construct metaphor annotations that enable comprehensive research on visual metaphors. As metaphors are more com-mon in visual Ads, we start with the Pitt’s Ads dataset im-ages [20] and then perform a rigorous multi-stage annota-tion process with expert annotators to ﬁlter metaphorical images, add metaphor annotations, and perform additional validation steps to clean the annotations3. While there is re-cent work making advances in understanding non-literal in-terpretations in natural language research [7, 12], this work proposes the ﬁrst step towards metaphor analysis in images.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, we perform comprehensive eval-uations with state-of-the-art techniques on four sets of tasks, which we call MetaCLUE: 1. Classiﬁcation: This is binary classiﬁcation task of estimating whether a given image con-tains a metaphor or not. In other words, Are visual features indicative of whether there exists a metaphor in a given im-age or not?. 2. Localization: Here, the task is to localize the image regions that invoke the primary and secondary concepts in the viewer. This is similar to a standard object detection task, but is more complicated in the case of visual metaphors as the primary/secondary concepts may not be explicitly present in an image. 3. Understanding: Can our models understand the metaphorical message in a given im-age? We pose this understanding problem as 3 tasks where we can quantitatively measure the performance: Retrieval,
Captioning and Visual question answering. 4. gEneration:
Can we generate an image that conveys the metaphor, given the metaphorical message as a text prompt? 3The Ads, while useful for the purposes of our paper, some images may perpetuate harmful stereotypes according to characteristics such as gender.
Figure 2. Sample Visual Metaphors with their Annotations. There are different types of visual metaphors. The type depends on how the primary and secondary concepts are visually depicted. Here are sample Ad images from [20] where we annotated the primary concept, secondary concept and their relationship.
We comprehensively evaluate existing state-of-the-art techniques for each of these tasks on our collected metaphor annotations. We evaluate the models both in a zero-shot manner as well as with ﬁnetuning on our annotations. Even though ﬁnetuning resulted in some improvements, most models struggle to produce satisfactory results in many cases, demonstrating the difﬁculty of these tasks. Our ex-periments highlight several strengths and weaknesses of the existing techniques on comprehending and generating vi-sual metaphors, providing a concrete ﬁrst step towards fur-ther AI research on this fascinating topic. 2.