Abstract
Existing few-shot segmentation methods are based on the meta-learning strategy and extract instance knowledge from a support set and then apply the knowledge to seg-ment target objects in a query set. However, the extracted knowledge is insufficient to cope with the variable intra-class differences since the knowledge is obtained from a few samples in the support set. To address the problem, we propose a multi-information aggregation network (MI-ANet) that effectively leverages the general knowledge, i.e., semantic word embeddings, and instance information for accurate segmentation. Specifically, in MIANet, a general information module (GIM) is proposed to extract a general class prototype from word embeddings as a supplement to instance information. To this end, we design a triplet loss that treats the general class prototype as an anchor and samples positive-negative pairs from local features in the support set. The calculated triplet loss can transfer seman-tic similarities among language identities from a word em-bedding space to a visual representation space. To alle-viate the model biasing towards the seen training classes and to obtain multi-scale information, we then introduce a non-parametric hierarchical prior module (HPM) to gener-ate unbiased instance-level information via calculating the pixel-level similarity between the support and query image features. Finally, an information fusion module (IFM) com-bines the general and instance information to make pre-dictions for the query image. Extensive experiments on
PASCAL-5i and COCO-20i show that MIANet yields supe-rior performance and set a new state-of-the-art. Code is available at github.com/Aldrich2y/MIANet. 1.

Introduction
The challenge of few-shot semantic segmentation (FSS) is how to effectively use one or five labeled samples to seg-ment a novel class. Existing few-shot segmentation meth-*Corresponding author (csqchen@scut.edu.cn).
Figure 1. Comparison between (a) existing FSS methods and (b) proposed MIANet. (a) Existing methods extract instance-level knowledge from the support images, which is not able to cope with large intra-class variation. (b) our MIANet extracts instance-level knowledge from the support images and obtains general class in-formation from word embeddings. These two types of information benefit the final segmentation. ods [28, 30, 33, 37] adopt the metric-based meta-learning strategy [26, 29]. The strategy is typically composed of two stages: meta-training and meta-testing.
In the meta-training stage, models are trained by plenty of independent few-shot segmentation tasks. In meta-testing, models can thus quickly adapt and extrapolate to new few-shot tasks of unseen classes and segment the novel categories since each training task involves a different seen class.
As shown in Figure 2, natural images of same categories have semantic differences and perspective distortion, which leads to intra-class differences. Current FSS approaches segment a query image by matching the guidance informa-tion from the support set with the query features (Figure 1 (a)). Unfortunately, the correlation between the support im-age and the query image is not enough to support the match-ate the model biasing towards the seen classes, we propose a non-parametric hierarchical prior module (HPM). HPM works in two aspects. (1) HPM is class-agnostic since it does not require training. (2) HPM can generate hierarchi-cal activation maps for the query image by digging out the relationship between high-level features for accurate seg-mentation of unseen classes. In addition, we build informa-tion channels between different scales to preserve discrim-inative information in query features. Finally, the unbiased instance-level information and the general information are aggregated by an information fusion module (IFM) to seg-ment the query image. Our main contributions are summa-rized as follows: (1) We propose a multi-information aggregation network (MIANet) to aggregate general information and unbi-ased instance-level information for accurate segmenta-tion. (2) To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time to use word embeddings in FSS, and we design a general information module (GIM) to obtain the general class information from word embeddings for each class.
The module is optimized through a well-designed triplet loss and can provide general class information to alleviate intra-class differences. (3) A non-parametric hierarchical prior module (HPM) is proposed to supply MIANet with unbiased instance-level segmentation knowledge, which provides the prior information of the query image on multi-scales and alleviates the bias problem in testing. (4) Our MIANet achieves state-of-the-art results on two few-shot segmentation benchmarks, i.e., PASCAL-5i and COCO-20i. Extensive experiments validate the ef-fectiveness of each component in our MIANet. 2.