Abstract
Semantic correspondence have built up a new way for object recognition. However current single-object match-ing schema can be hard for discovering commonalities for a category and far from the real-world recognition tasks. To fill this gap, we design the multi-instance semantic corre-spondence task which aims at constructing the correspon-dence between multiple objects in an image pair. To sup-port this task, we build a multi-instance semantic corre-spondence (MISC) dataset from COCO Detection 2017 task called MISC210K. We construct our dataset as three steps: (1) category selection and data cleaning; (2) keypoint de-sign based on 3D models and object description rules; (3) human-machine collaborative annotation. Following these steps, we select 34 classes of objects with 4,812 challenging images annotated via a well designed semi-automatic work-flow, and finally acquire 218,179 image pairs with instance masks and instance-level keypoint pairs annotated. We de-sign a dual-path collaborative learning pipeline to train instance-level co-segmentation task and fine-grained level correspondence task together. Benchmark evaluation and further ablation results with detailed analysis are provided with three future directions proposed. Our project is avail-able on https://github.com/YXSUNMADMAX/MISC210K. 1.

Introduction
Building dense visual correspondences is a sub-task of image matching, which aims at finding semantic associ-ations of salient parts and feature points of objects or scenes [4,6,34,49]. This task has established a new way for understanding commonalities among objects in a more fine-grained manner and has been widely used for various com-puter vision tasks, including few shot learning [11, 21, 48],
∗: Contribution Equally
†: Corresponding Authors
Figure 1. An instructive overview for our multi-instance semantic correspondence task. In this task, models are required to determine the corresponding relationships among multiple instances, where instance masks are introduced for grouping matching key-points. multi-object tracking [24], and image editing [10, 15, 32].
To learn general semantic correspondence, several popu-lar datasets, such as Caltech-101 [14], FG3DCar [37], PF-WILLOW [8], PF-PASCAL [8], and SPair-71k [27], have been proposed by researchers to train machine learning models. These datasets were designed to capture large intra-class variations in color, scale, orientation, illumination and non-rigid deformation. However, although these datasets provide rich annotations, they are still far from real-world applications because each object category is only allowed to have at most one instance in each image. Moreover, for most object recognition tasks and applications, multiple ob-jects of the same category often appear at the same time.
Existing datasets only focus on one-to-one matching with-out considering multi-instance scenes, and thus cannot be used as simulations of real-world applications.
In this paper, we aim to reduce the gap between one-to-one matching and many-to-many matching by building a new multi-instance semantic correspondence dataset. Fol-lowing PF-PASCAL [8] and SPair-71k [27], we label key-points on objects to construct the dataset. There are sev-eral key challenges during data labeling. First, how to choose the collection of raw images that contain multiple objects in natural scenes? Second, how to choose candi-date object categories that have rich keypoints with dis-criminative semantics? Third, how to ensure label quality while maintaining high annotation efficiency? Last, how to design an evaluation protocol for multi-instance seman-tic correspondence? While addressing the above issues, we construct a new multi-instance semantic correspondence dataset, called MISC210K, which collects 34 different ob-ject classes from COCO 2017 detection challenge [20] and contains 218,179 image pairs with large variations in view-point, scale, occlusion, and truncation. Compared with pop-ular PF-PASCAL [8] and SPair-71k [27], MISC210K has much more annotated instances, covers a boarder range of object categories and presents a large number of many-to-many matching cases. Besides, we also design a new pro-tocol to evaluate many-to-many semantic matching algo-rithms. All these characteristics make MISC210K appeal-ing to the relevant research community.
We summarize main characteristics of MISC210K as follows. First, MISC210K provides annotations for many-to-many matching. Unlike previous datasets [8, 27] which only exploit one-to-one matching, we find out all semantic correspondences among multiple objects (up to 4) across image pairs as shown in Figure 1. Second, MISC210K has more complicated annotations. The number of keypoints in
SPair-71k varies from 3 to 30 across categories.
In con-trast, we well design more keypoints to highlight object contours, skeletal joints, and other distinctive feature points that can characterize objects in detail. Third, MISC210K has a larger scale in comparison to existing datasets.
It contains 218,179 image pairs across 34 object categories, which is three times larger than the previous largest dataset,
SPair-71k. Fourth, intra-class variations in MISC210K are more challenging. In addition to variations considered in
Spair-71k [26], we also introduce more challenging varia-tions, such as mutual occlusion of multiple objects and per-spective distortions in complex scenes.
To investigate whether MISC210K can help learn gen-eral correspondences across multiple object instances, we evaluate previous state-of-the-art methods, MMNet [49],
CATs [4] on MSIC210K. We also propose a dual-path multi-task learning pipeline to solve the complicated multi-instance semantic correspondence problem. For both tasks of correspondence and instance co-segmentation, we de-signed multi-instance PCK (mPCK) and mIOU (instance) from works [8,25,49]. According to the results, we identify new challenges in this task: (1) extracting discriminative features plays a precursory role to find out commonalities across multiple objects; (2) the uncertainty in the number of matching keypoints makes the matching process more difficult; (3) multiple object instances bring occlusion, in-terlacing, and other challenging issues. These observations indicate that multi-instance semantic correspondence is a challenging problem deserving further investigation.
This paper is organized as follows. We first describe the MISC210K dataset, its collection process, and statistics.
Then we introduce a generic framework for multi-instance semantic correspondence, which enables neural networks to associate salient feature points of object instances across different images. The proposed dual-path collaborative learning (DPCL) pipeline outperforms the transfer of pre-vious one-to-one semantic correspondence algorithms. We further analyze the characteristics of MISC210K and dis-cuss key issues in multi-instance semantic correspondence. 2.