Abstract 1.

Introduction
This paper firstly presents old photo modernization us-ing multiple references by performing stylization and en-hancement in a unified manner. In order to modernize old photos, we propose a novel multi-reference-based old photo modernization (MROPM) framework consisting of a net-work MROPM-Net and a novel synthetic data generation scheme. MROPM-Net stylizes old photos using multiple ref-erences via photorealistic style transfer (PST) and further enhances the results to produce modern-looking images.
Meanwhile, the synthetic data generation scheme trains the network to effectively utilize multiple references to perform modernization. To evaluate the performance, we propose a new old photos benchmark dataset (CHD) consisting of di-verse natural indoor and outdoor scenes. Extensive exper-iments show that the proposed method outperforms other baselines in performing modernization on real old photos, even though no old photos were used during training. More-over, our method can appropriately select styles from mul-tiple references for each semantic region in the old photo to further improve the modernization performance.
*Soo Ye Kim is currently affiliated with Adobe Research.
†Hyeonjun Sim is currently affiliated with Qualcomm.
‡Corresponding author.
Old photos taken a long time ago may contain impor-tant information that carry cultural and heritage values, e.g., photos of Queen Elizabeth II’s coronation. Such old im-ages may contain multiple degradations, e.g., scratches, and old photo artifacts, e.g., color fading, often preventing peo-ple from understanding the scene. To restore these images, a skilled expert needs to perform laborious manual pro-cesses such as degradation restoration and modernization, i.e., colorization or enhancement, to make them look mod-ern [44]. Consequently, early studies [8, 39] try to restore damaged old photos automatically by using traditional in-painting techniques. However, solely re-synthesizing dam-aged regions in the image is inadequate to ensure old photos look modern, as the overall style remains similar.
Recent work [28] formulates the task as time-travel rephotography which aims to translate old photos into a modern photos space. The authors considered a multi-task problem consisting of two main tasks: (i) restora-tion of old photos with both unstructured (noise, blur) and structured (scratch, crack) degradations; (ii) modernization which aims to change old photos’ characteristics to look like modern images, e.g., better color saturation and contrast by using colorization [28, 48] or enhancement [42]. However, simply using an enhancement method [42] fails to modern-ize old photos, as shown in Fig. 1, since the overall look
still remains similar to old photos, e.g., with a sepia color.
In this paper, we propose to modernize old color pho-tos of natural scenes by changing their styles and enhancing them to look modern. For this, a novel unified framework is proposed which leverages multiple modern photo refer-ences in solving the modernization task of old photos by utilizing photorealistic style transfer (PST). Although one prior work [48] is also reference-based, it only relies on a single reference to colorize greyscale portrait photos. How-ever, in natural scene cases, it is challenging to find a sin-gle modern photo as a reference that can well match the whole semantics of an old photo. Moreover, changing only the color is not sufficient to alter the overall look of an im-age [12]. Thus, our framework uses multiple references to modernize old photos by changing the style instead of only the color. Since there is no public old photos benchmark dataset of natural scenes, we propose a new Cultural Her-itage Dataset (CHD) with 644 indoor and outdoor old color photos collected from various national museums in Korea.
Our multiple-reference-based old photo modernization framework (MROPM) consists of two main parts: (i)
MROPM-Net and (ii) a novel training strategy that enables the network to utilize multiple references. The MROPM-Net consists of two different subnets: The first is a single stylization subnet that transfers both global and local styles without any semantic segmentation from a modern photo into an old photo; Specifically, we propose an improved ver-sion of WCT2 [51], inspired by its universal generalization, as the backbone of the single stylization subnet, and present a new architecture that can perform both global PST and lo-cal PST without requiring any semantic segmentation; The second is a merging-refinement subnet that merges multiple stylization results from multiple references based on seman-tic similarities and further refines the merged result to pro-duce a modernized version of the old photo. To effectively train the MROPM-Net, we propose a synthetic data gener-ation scheme that uses the style-variant (i.e., color jittering and unstructured degradation) and -invariant (i.e., rotation, flipping, and translation) transformations. Our MROPM can modernize old photos better than the state-of-the-art (SOTA) old photo restoration method [42], even without us-ing any old photos during training, thanks to the generaliza-tion of PST. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose the first old photo modernization frame-work (MROPM) that allows the usage of multiple ref-erences to guide the modernization process.
• Our photorealistic multi-stylization network and train-ing strategy enable the MROPM-Net to utilize multiple style references in modernizing old photos.
• Our training strategy based on synthetic data allows the MROPM-Net to modernize real old photos even without using any old photos during training.
• We propose a new old photo dataset of natural scenes, called Cultural Heritage Dataset (CHD), with 644 out-door and indoor cultural heritage images. 2.