Abstract
The main challenge of Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) lies in maintaining a continuous trajectory for each tar-get. Existing methods often learn reliable motion pat-terns to match the same target between adjacent frames and discriminative appearance features to re-identify the lost targets after a long period. However, the reliability of motion prediction and the discriminability of appear-ances can be easily hurt by dense crowds and extreme oc-clusions in the tracking process.
In this paper, we pro-pose a simple yet effective multi-object tracker, i.e., Mo-tionTrack, which learns robust short-term and long-term motions in a unified framework to associate trajectories from a short to long range. For dense crowds, we design a novel Interaction Module to learn interaction-aware mo-tions from short-term trajectories, which can estimate the complex movement of each target. For extreme occlusions, we build a novel Refind Module to learn reliable long-term motions from the target’s history trajectory, which can link the interrupted trajectory with its correspond-ing detection. Our Interaction Module and Refind Mod-ule are embedded in the well-known tracking-by-detection paradigm, which can work in tandem to maintain superior performance. Extensive experimental results on MOT17 and MOT20 datasets demonstrate the superiority of our approach in challenging scenarios, and it achieves state-of-the-art performances at various MOT metrics. Code is available at https://github.com/qwomeng/MotionTrack. 1.

Introduction
Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) is a fundamental task in computer vision, which has a wide range of applications,
†Co-first authors. ∗Corresponding author.
Illustration of challenging scenarios in different
Figure 1. videos. (a) Dense crowds. Pedestrians do not move independently in this situation. They will be affected by their surrounding neigh-bors to avoid collisions which will make their motion patterns hard to learn in practice. (b) Extreme occlusion. Pedestrians are eas-ily occluded by fixed facilities for a long period, such as billboard and sunshade, in which the dynamic environment will make them undergone a large appearance variation. such as autonomous driving [8] and intelligent surveil-lance [29]. It aims at jointly locating targets through bound-ing boxes and recognizing their identities throughout a whole video [40]. Though great progress has been made in the past few years, MOT still remains a challenging task due to the dynamic environment, such as dense crowds and extreme occlusions, in the tracking scenario.
In general, the existing MOT methods either follow the tracking-by-detection [2] or tracking-by-regression [39, 40, 59], paradigm. The former methods first detect objects in each video frame and then associate detections between ad-jacent frames to create individual object tracks over time.
The latter methods conduct tracking differently: the ob-ject detector not only provides frame-wise detections but also replaces the data association with a continuous regres-sion of each tracklet to its new position. Regardless of the
paradigm, all methods need to address the short-range and long-range association problems, i.e., how to associate the alive tracklets with detections in a short time, and how to re-identify the lost tracklets with detections after a long pe-riod.
For the short-range association problem, discriminative motion patterns and appearance features [5, 44] are of-ten learned to conduct data association between adjacent frames. However, as shown in Figure 1 (a), it is tough to learn discriminative representations in the dense crowd sce-nario. On the one hand, the bounding boxes of detections are too small to be distinguished by their appearances. On the other hand, different targets need to plan suitable paths to avoid collisions, which makes the resulting motions very complex in the tracking process. For the long-range asso-ciation problem, prior works [24, 43, 44] usually learn dis-criminative appearance features to re-identify the lost tar-gets after long occlusion [56–58]. As shown in Figure 1 (b), the main bottleneck of these methods is how to keep the ro-bustness of features against different poses, low resolution, and poor illumination for the same target. To alleviate this issue, the memory technology [7, 46] is widely applied to store diverse features for each target to match different tar-gets in a multi-query manner. Moreover, a lot of memo-ries and time will be consumed by the memory module and multi-query regime, unfriendly to real-time tracking.
In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective object tracker, i.e., MotionTrack, to address the short-range and long-range association problems in MOT. In particular, our
MotionTrack follows the tracking-by-detection paradigm, in which both interaction-aware and history trajectory-based motions are learned to associate trajectories from a short to long range. To deal with the short-range association problem, we design a novel Interaction Module to model all interactions between targets, which can predict their com-plex motions to avoid collisions. The Interaction Module uses an asymmetric adjacency matrix to represent the inter-action between targets, and obtains the prediction after the information fusion by a graph convolution network. Thanks to the captured target interaction, those short-term occluded targets can be successfully tracked in dense crowds. To deal with the long-range association problem, we design a novel
Refind Module based on the history trajectory of each tar-get. It can effectively re-identify the lost targets through two steps: correlation calculation and error compensation. For the lost tracklets and the unmatched detections, the correla-tion calculation step takes the features of history trajectories and current detections as input, and computes a correlation matrix to represent the possibility that they are associated.
Afterward, the error compensation step is further taken to revise the occluded trajectories. Extensive experiments on two benchmark datasets (MOT17 and MOT20) demonstrate that our proposed MotionTrack outperforms the previous state-of-the-art methods.
The main contribution of this work can be highlighted as follows: (1) We propose a simple yet effective multi-object tracker, MotionTrack, to address the short-range and long-range association problems; (2) We design a novel Interac-tion Module to model the interaction between targets, which can handle complex motions in dense crowds; (3) We design a novel Refind Module to learn discriminative motion pat-terns, which can re-identify the lost tracklets with current detections. 2.