Abstract
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has been increasingly appealing to the society of object Re-Identiﬁcation (ReID), for that task-speciﬁc architectures signiﬁcantly improve the retrieval performance. Previous works explore new opti-mizing targets and search spaces for NAS ReID, yet they neglect the difference of training schemes between image classiﬁcation and ReID. In this work, we propose a novel
Twins Contrastive Mechanism (TCM) to provide more ap-propriate supervision for ReID architecture search. TCM reduces the category overlaps between the training and val-idation data, and assists NAS in simulating real-world ReID training schemes. We then design a Multi-Scale Interac-tion (MSI) search space to search for rational interaction operations between multi-scale features.
In addition, we introduce a Spatial Alignment Module (SAM) to further enhance the attention consistency confronted with images from different sources. Under the proposed NAS scheme, a speciﬁc architecture is automatically searched, named as MSINet. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method surpasses state-of-the-art ReID methods on both in-domain and cross-domain scenarios. Source code available in https://github.com/vimar-gu/MSINet. 1.

Introduction
Object re-identiﬁcation (Re-ID) aims at retrieving spe-ciﬁc object instances across different views [39, 40, 57, 65, 70], which attracts much attention in computer vi-sion community due to its wide-range applications. Pre-vious works have achieved great progresses on both super-vised [42, 49, 58] and unsupervised ReID tasks [17, 50, 78], most of which adopts backbone models originally designed for general image classiﬁcation tasks [20, 52].
Recent literature [64, 75] has shown that applying differ-*Co-corresponding authors hood bumper luggage carrier side decorations
Figure 1. The left panel shows the example activation maps of
ResNet50 (1st row) and MSINet (2nd row). The right panel shows the average distances between the most similar 10 negative sam-ples and each query image at the inference. Best viewed in color. ent architectures on ReID leads to large performance vari-ations. Some works employ Neural Architecture Search (NAS) for ReID [28, 45]. The proposed optimizing targets and search spaces stably improve the model performance, yet the main search scheme still follows traditional NAS methods designed for general classiﬁcation tasks [12, 36].
As an open-set task, ReID contains different categories in the training and validation sets [64, 71], while the two sets share exactly the same categories in standard classiﬁca-tion tasks [10], which is also followed by traditional NAS methods. The incompatibility between search schemes and real-world training schemes makes the searched architec-ture sub-optimal for ReID. Moreover, ReID is required to distinguish more subtle distinctions among ﬁne-grained in-stances compared with image-level classiﬁcation [48, 63].
Some previous works [4,44,68,75] have manifested that lo-cal perspectives and multi-scale features are discriminative for ReID. However, current utilizations of these features are mostly empirically designed, which can be more ﬂexible according to the characteristics of different network layers.
In this work, we propose a novel NAS scheme aiming at addressing the aforementioned challenges. In order to sim-ulate the real-world ReID training schemes, a Twins Con-trastive Mechanism (TCM) is proposed to unbind the cat-egories of the training and validation sets. An adjustable overlap ratio of categories builds up the compatibility be-tween NAS and ReID, which provides more appropriate su-pervision for ReID architecture search. Moreover, to search for more rational utilizations of multi-scale features, we de-sign a Multi-Scale Interaction (MSI) search space. The MSI space focuses on interaction operations between multi-scale features along the shallow and deep layers of the network, which guides the features to promote each other. Addi-tionally, to further improve the generalization capability, we propose a Spatial Alignment Module (SAM) to enhance the attention consistency of the model confronted with images from different sources. With the above NAS scheme, we obtain a light-weight yet effective model architecture, de-noted as Multi-Scale Interaction Net (MSINet).
We visualize the example activation maps of our pro-posed MSINet and ResNet50 [20] trained on VeRi-776 [38, 39] in Fig. 1. Compared to ResNet50, MSINet focuses on more unique distinctions with speciﬁc semantic informa-tion to recognize instances. Besides, MSINet largely in-creases the distance margin between query image and cor-responding negative samples, reﬂecting extraordinary dis-criminative capability. Extensive experiments demonstrate that MSINet surpasses state-of-the-art (SOTA) ReID meth-ods on both in-domain and cross-domain scenarios. Our source codes are available in the supplementary material.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to build the NAS search scheme according to the real-world
ReID training schemes, which provides more appro-priate supervision for the ReID architecture search.
• We propose a novel search space based on the Multi-Scale Interaction (MSI) operations and a Spatial
Alignment Module (SAM) to improve the model per-formance on in-domain and cross-domain scenarios.
• We construct a light-weight yet effective architec-ture for ReID tasks, denoted as MSINet. With only 2.3M parameters, MSINet surpasses ResNet50 [20] by 9% mAP on MSMT17 [60] and 16% mAP on
MSMT17→Market-1501 [69]. 2.