Abstract
Recent progress in neural implicit functions has set new state-of-the-art in reconstructing high-fidelity 3D shapes from a collection of images. However, these approaches are limited to closed surfaces as they require the surface to be represented by a signed distance field. In this paper, we pro-pose NeAT, a new neural rendering framework that can learn implicit surfaces with arbitrary topologies from multi-view images. In particular, NeAT represents the 3D surface as a level set of a signed distance function (SDF) with a validity branch for estimating the surface existence probability at the query positions. We also develop a novel neural volume ren-dering method, which uses SDF and validity to calculate the volume opacity and avoids rendering points with low valid-ity. NeAT supports easy field-to-mesh conversion using the classic Marching Cubes algorithm. Extensive experiments on DTU [20], MGN [4], and Deep Fashion 3D [19] datasets indicate that our approach is able to faithfully reconstruct both watertight and non-watertight surfaces. In particular,
NeAT significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in the task of open surface reconstruction both quantitatively and qualitatively. 1.

Introduction 3D reconstruction from multi-view images is a funda-mental problem in computer vision and computer graphics.
Recent advances in neural implicit functions [26, 36, 48, 55] have brought impressive progress in achieving high-fidelity reconstruction of complex geometry even with sparse views.
They use differentiable rendering to render the inferred im-plicit surface into images which are compared with the input images for network supervision. This provides a promis-ing alternative of learning 3D shapes directly from 2D im-ages without 3D data. However, existing neural render-ing methods represent surfaces as signed distance function (SDF) [27, 55] or occupancy field [36, 38], limiting their output to closed surfaces. This leads to a barrier in recon-structing a large variety of real-world objects with open boundaries, such as 3D garments, walls of a scanned 3D scene, etc. The recently proposed NDF [10], 3PSDF [6]
and GIFS [56] introduce new implicit representations sup-porting 3D geometry with arbitrary topologies, including both closed and open surfaces. However, none of these rep-resentations are compatible with existing neural rendering frameworks. Leveraging neural implicit rendering to recon-struct non-watertight shapes, i.e., shapes with open surfaces, from multi-view images remains a virgin land.
We fill this gap by presenting NeAT, a Neural render-ing framework that reconstructs surfaces with Arbitrary
Topologies using multi-view supervision. Unlike previous neural rendering frameworks only using color and SDF pre-dictions, we propose a validity branch to estimate the surface existence probability at the query positions, thus avoiding rendering 3D points with low validity as shown in Figure 2. In contrast to 3PSDF [6] and GIFS [56], our validity estimation is a differentiable process. It is compatible with the volume rendering framework while maintaining its flexi-bility in representing arbitrary 3D topologies. To correctly render both closed and open surfaces, we introduce a sign adjustment scheme to render both sides of surfaces, while maintaining unbiased weights and occlusion-aware proper-ties as previous volume renderers. In addition, to reconstruct intricate geometry, a specially tailored regularization mecha-nism is proposed to promote the formation of open surfaces.
By minimizing the difference between the rendered and the ground-truth pixels, we can faithfully reconstruct both the validity and SDF field from the input images. At reconstruc-tion time, the predicted validity value along with the SDF value can be readily converted to 3D mesh with the clas-sic field-to-mesh conversion techniques, e.g., the Marching
Cubes Algorithm [30].
We evaluate NeAT in the task of multi-view reconstruc-tion on a large variety of challenging shapes, including both closed and open surfaces. NeAT can consistently outperform the current state-of-the-art methods both qualitatively and quantitatively. We also show that NeAT can provide efficient supervision for learning complex shape priors that can be used for reconstructing non-watertight surface only from a single image. Our contributions can be summarized as:
• A neat neural rendering scheme of implicit surface, coded NeAT, that introduces a novel validity branch, and, for the first time, can faithfully reconstruct surfaces with arbitrary topologies from multi-view images.
• A specially tailored learning paradigm for NeAT with effective regularization for open surfaces.
• NeAT sets the new state-of-the-art on multi-view re-construction on open surfaces across a wide range of benchmarks. 2.