Abstract
Dynamic Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) is a powerful algorithm capable of rendering photo-realistic novel view images from a monocular RGB video of a dynamic scene.
Although it warps moving points across frames from the observation spaces to a common canonical space for ren-dering, dynamic NeRF does not model the change of the reflected color during the warping. As a result, this ap-proach often fails drastically on challenging specular ob-jects in motion. We address this limitation by reformulat-ing the neural radiance field function to be conditioned on surface position and orientation in the observation space.
This allows the specular surface at different poses to keep the different reflected colors when mapped to the common canonical space. Additionally, we add the mask of moving objects to guide the deformation field. As the specular sur-face changes color during motion, the mask mitigates the problem of failure to find temporal correspondences with only RGB supervision. We evaluate our model based on the novel view synthesis quality with a self-collected dataset of different moving specular objects in realistic environments.
The experimental results demonstrate that our method sig-nificantly improves the reconstruction quality of moving specular objects from monocular RGB videos compared to the existing NeRF models. Our code and data are available at the project website 1. 1.

Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [25] trained with multi-view images can synthesize novel views for 3D scenes with photo-realistic quality. NeRF predicts the volume density and view dependent color of the sampled spatial points in the scene with a multi-layer perceptron (MLP). Recent works such as Nerfies [32] and NSFF [22] extend NeRF to reconstruct dynamic scenes from monocular videos. They resolve the lack of multi-view image supervision in dy-namic scenes using a deformation field, which warps dif-1https://github.com/JokerYan/NeRF-DS
Figure 1. Comparison of novel views rendered by HyperN-eRF [33] (left) and our NeRF-DS (right), on the “americano” scene in the HyperNeRF dataset [33]2(top) and the “basin” scene in our dynamic specular dataset (bottom). Our NeRF-DS model signifi-cantly improves the reconstruction quality by a surface-aware dy-namic NeRF and a mask guided deformation field. ferent observation spaces to a common canonical space.
Despite showing promising results, we find that the ex-isting dynamic NeRFs do not consider specular reflections during warping and often fail drastically on challenging dy-namic specular objects as shown in Fig. 1. The quality of dynamic specular object reconstruction is important be-cause specular (e.g. metallic, plastic) surfaces are common in our daily environment and furthermore it indicates how accurate a dynamic NeRF represents the radiance field un-der motion or deformation. Previous works such as Ref-NeRF [50] and NeRV [45] have only focused on improving the specular reconstruction in static scenes. The problem of reconstructing dynamic specular objects with NeRF remain largely unexplored.
We postulate that one of the reasons for dynamic models to fail on moving specular objects is because they do not 2The rendered frames come from the first 3 seconds of the “americano” scene when the cup is rotating. This part of the video is not included in the
HyperNeRF [33] qualitative results.
consider the original surface information when rendering in a common canonical space. As suggested in rendering mod-els such as Phong shading [34], the specular color depends on the relative position and orientation of the surface with respect to the reflected environment. Nonetheless, existing dynamic NeRFs often ignore the original position and ori-entation of the surface when warping a specular object to a common canonical space for rendering. As the result, a point on a specular object reflecting different colors at dif-ferent positions and orientations can cause conflicts when warped to a common canonical space. Additionally, the key of existing dynamic models is to learn a deformation field for each frame such that correspondences can be established in a shared canonical space. However, the color of specular objects can vary significantly at different locations and ori-entations, which makes it hard to establish correspondences with the RGB supervision alone. These two limitations in-evitably lead to the failure of existing dynamic models when applied to specular objects.
In this paper, we introduce NeRF-DS (Fig. 2) which models dynamic specular objects using a surface-aware dy-namic NeRF and a mask guided deformation field to miti-gate the two limitations mentioned above. 1) Our NeRF-DS still warps the points from the observation space to a com-mon canonical space and predicts their volume density. In contrast to other dynamic NeRFs, the color of each point is additionally conditioned on the spatial coordinate and sur-face normal in the observation space before warping. Cor-responding points from different frames can share the same geometry, but reflect different colors determined by their original surface position and orientation. 2) Our NeRF-DS reuses the moving object mask from the camera registra-tion stage as an additional input to the deformation field.
This mask is a more consistent guidance for specular sur-faces in motion compared to the constantly changing color.
The mask is also a strong cue to the deformation field on the moving and static regions. As shown in Fig. 1, our pro-posed NeRF-DS reconstructs and renders dynamic specular scenes with significantly higher quality. of
We implement our NeRF-DS on the top state-of-the-art HyperNeRF [33] for dyanmic scenes.
Since there are very limited dynamic specular objects in the existing datasets, we collect another dynamic specular dataset for evaluation. Our dataset consists of a variety of moving/deforming specular objects in realistic environ-ments. Experimental results on the dataset demonstrate that the NeRF-DS significantly improves the quality of novel view rendering on dynamic specular objects. The images rendered by our NeRF-DS avoid many serious artifacts compared to the existing NeRF models.
In summary, we have made the following contributions: 1. A reparameterized dynamic NeRF that models dy-namic specular surface with additional observation space coordinate and surface normal. 2. A mask guided deformation field that improves defor-mation learned for dynamic specular objects. 3. A dynamic specular scene dataset with training and testing monocular videos. 2.