Abstract
Extracting parametric edge curves from point clouds is a fundamental problem in 3D vision and geometry process-ing. Existing approaches mainly rely on keypoint detection, a challenging procedure that tends to generate noisy out-put, making the subsequent edge extraction error-prone. To address this issue, we propose to directly detect structured edges to circumvent the limitations of the previous point-wise methods. We achieve this goal by presenting NerVE, a novel neural volumetric edge representation that can be easily learned through a volumetric learning framework. NerVE can be seamlessly converted to a versatile piece-wise lin-ear (PWL) curve representation, enabling a unified strategy for learning all types of free-form curves. Furthermore, as
NerVE encodes rich structural information, we show that edge extraction based on NerVE can be reduced to a simple graph search problem. After converting NerVE to the PWL representation, parametric curves can be obtained via off-the-shelf spline fitting algorithms. We evaluate our method on the challenging ABC dataset [19]. We show that a sim-ple network based on NerVE can already outperform the previous state-of-the-art methods by a great margin. 1.

Introduction
The advances of 3D scanning techniques have enabled us to digitize and reconstruct the physical world, benefiting a wide range of applications including 3D modeling, industrial design, robotic vision, etc. However, point clouds, the raw output of a 3D scanner, are typically noisy, unstructured, and can exhibit strong sampling bias. Hence, extracting struc-tured features, such as the feature edges, from an unordered point cloud is a vital geometry processing task. Sharp ge-ometric edges can be used as an abstraction of a complex 3D shape, facilitating downstream tasks including surface
*Xiangyu Zhu and Dong Du contribute equally.
†Corresponding author’s email: hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn
Figure 1. We present NerVE, a neural volumetric edge representa-tion for parametric curve extraction from point clouds. Our method can predict structured NerVE instead of unstructured edge points in previous methods, and directly convert NerVE into piece-wise linear (PWL) curves, reducing the error-prone post-processing of previous methods into simple graph search on PWL curves. Post-processing includes (a) Endpoint detection;(b) Graph structure analysis;(c) Points thinning;(d) Special treatment for closed curves. reconstruction, normal estimation, and shape classification.
Previous state-of-the-art methods mainly resort to a keypoint fitting strategy to extract parametric edge curves from a point cloud. Specifically, they first detect a sparse set of keypoints, such as the endpoints or points on sharp edges, and then group these points into individual sets according to prede-fined topologies. Finally, each point set is converted into a parametric curve using spline fitting.
Recent approaches have strove to improve the accuracy of edge point detection by using hand-crafted features [26] or deep neural networks [2, 25, 36, 41]. Despite the impressive progress that has been made, existing works still have the following limitations. 1) The widely adopted point-wise clas-sification approaches tend to generate noisy estimations – the predicted edge points typically contain a spurious set of can-didate points (see Fig. 5), which requires further processing for keypoint cleaning and increases the risk of false/missing connections. 2) The grouping procedure highly relies on the accuracy of endpoint detection. However, it remains difficult
to accurately locate endpoints especially when the normal of its surrounding points change smoothly. 3) They require tedious treatments to cope with different curve topologies, including curve type estimation, topology-dependent artifact points removal and curve connection, etc.
Our key observation is that the above issues can be re-solved if we can directly predict structured edges in the form of piece-wise linear (PWL) curves from the input point cloud. This bypasses the problematic keypoint detection and avoids the error-prone edge extraction in the curve fitting stage. In addition, PWL curve is a general representation of free-form curves, removing the need of curve topology esti-mation and the laborious curve fitting and post-processing dependent on curve category. Furthermore, PWL curves can be easily converted to parametric curves using the off-the-shelf solutions. However, unlike its parametric counterpart,
PWL curves are notoriously difficult to predict due to its large degrees of freedom.
Towards this end, we propose NerVE, a novel neural edge representation in a volumetric fashion. As shown in Fig. 3,
NerVE represents 3D structured edges using a regular grid of volumetric cubes – each cube encodes rich structural information including 1) one binary indicator of edge occu-pancy, 2) edge orientations (if any), and 3) one edge point position (if any). Thereby, NerVE can be readily converted to PWL curves by connecting the edge points enclosed by
NerVE cubes according to the encoded point connectivity.
The introduction of NerVE brings several advantages. First, the generated NerVE cubes are structured by itself, which greatly simplifies the process of curve extraction. Second, it is fully compatible with the PWL curve representation, and hence, can deal with all types of curves in a unified manner.
Third, NerVE cubes can be viewed as a coarse representation of the point cloud. Predicting the occupancy of a volumetric cube is easier and more robust than point-wise classification.
Therefore, we are less likely to suffer from the issue of miss-ing curves (see our results in Fig. 6). Lastly, inferring NerVE can be formulated as a voxel-wise classification and regres-sion problem, where the well-developed 3D convolutional networks can be directly employed.
We further propose a volumetric learning framework to predict NerVE from the input point cloud. We first encode the point features into a volumetric feature grid with the same resolution of the output. Then, a multi-head decoder is used to predict the attributes of a NerVE cube from its corresponding feature cell. After converting the NerVE cubes into PWL curves, a specially-tailored post-processing procedure is proposed to correct potential topology errors in the resulting curves. Finally, the parametric curves can be obtained via a straightforward spline fitting algorithm.
We evaluate our method on the ABC dataset [19], a large-scale collection of computer-aided design (CAD) models with challenging topology variations. In particular, we com-pare with the state-of-the-art approaches on two different tasks: edge estimation and parametric curve extraction. Ex-perimental results show that by leveraging the proposed
NerVE representation, our method can faithfully extract complete and accurate edges and parametric curves from in-tricate CAD models, outperforming the other methods both qualitatively and quantitatively.
We summarize our contributions as follows:
• We propose NerVE, a learnable neural volumetric edge representation that supports direct estimation of struc-tured 3D edges, seamless conversion with general PWL curves, and compatibility with latest volumetric learn-ing framework.
• A pipeline for parametric curve extraction from point cloud that consists of a learning-based framework for faithful NerVE cubes estimation and a post-processing module for curve topology correction.
• We set a new state-of-the-art on the ABC dataset in the task of parametric curve extraction from point cloud. 2.