Abstract
This paper studies implicit surface reconstruction lever-aging differentiable ray casting. Previous works such as
IDR [34] and NeuS [27] overlook the spatial context in 3D space when predicting and rendering the surface, thereby may fail to capture sharp local topologies such as small holes and structures. To mitigate the limitation, we pro-pose a flexible neural implicit representation leveraging hi-erarchical voxel grids, namely Neural Deformable Anchor (NeuDA), for high-fidelity surface reconstruction. NeuDA maintains the hierarchical anchor grids where each vertex stores a 3D position (or anchor) instead of the direct em-bedding (or feature). We optimize the anchor grids such that different local geometry structures can be adaptively encoded. Besides, we dig into the frequency encoding strategies and introduce a simple hierarchical positional encoding method for the hierarchical anchor structure to flexibly exploit the properties of high-frequency and low-frequency geometry and appearance. Experiments on both the DTU [8] and BlendedMVS [32] datasets demonstrate that NeuDA can produce promising mesh surfaces. 1.

Introduction 3D surface reconstruction from multi-view images is one of the fundamental problems of the community. Typical
Multi-view Stereo (MVS) approaches perform cross-view feature matching, depth fusion, and surface reconstruction (e.g., Poisson Surface Reconstruction) to obtain triangle meshes [9]. Some methods have exploited the possibility of training end-to-end deep MVS models or employing deep networks to improve the accuracy of sub-tasks of the MVS pipeline. Recent advances show that neural implicit func-tions are promising to represent scene geometry and ap-pearance [12, 14–16, 18–21, 27, 28, 33, 34, 37]. For exam-ple, several works [6, 27, 30, 34] define the implicit surface as a zero-level set and have captured impressive topologies.
Their neural implicit models are trained in a self-supervised
*Corresponding author.
Figure 1. We show the surface reconstruction results produced by
NeuDA and the two baseline methods, including NeuS [27] and
Intsnt-NeuS [17, 27]. Intsnt-NeuS is the reproduced NeuS lever-aging the multi-resolution hash encoding technique [17]. We can see NeuDA can promisingly preserve more surface details. Please refer to Figure 5 for more qualitative comparisons. manner by rendering faithful 2D appearance of geometry leveraging differentiable rendering. However, the surface prediction and rendering formulations of these approaches have not explored the spatial context in 3D space. As a re-sult, they may struggle to recover fine-grain geometry in some local spaces, such as boundaries, holes, and other small structures (See Fig. 1).
A straightforward solution is to query scene properties of a sampled 3D point by fusing its nearby features.
For example, we can represent scenes as neural voxel fields [3, 13, 22, 24, 25] where the embedding (or feature) at each vertex of the voxel encodes the geometry and appearance context. Given a target point, we are able to 1
Figure 2. We elaborate on the main differences between the hierarchical deformable anchors representation and some baseline variants.
From left to right: (1) Methods such as NeuS [27], volSDF [33], and UNISUFR [19] sample points along a single ray; (2, 3) Standard voxel grid approaches store a learnable embedding (or) feature at each vertex. Spatial context could be simply handled through the feature aggregation operation. The multi-resolution (or hierarchical) voxel grid representation can further explore different receptive fields; (4)
Our method maintains a 3D position (or anchor point) instead of a feature vector at each vertex. We optimize the anchor points such that different geometry structures can be adaptively represented. aggregate the features of the surrounding eight vertices.
As the scope of neighboring information is limited by the resolution of grids, multi-level (or hierarchical) voxel grids have been adopted to study different receptive fields [17, 21, 25, 28, 30, 36]. These approaches do obtain sharper surface details compared to baselines for most cases, but still cannot capture detailed regions well. A possible reason is that the geometry features held by the voxel grids are uniformly distributed around 3D surfaces, while small structures are with complicated typologies and may need more flexible representations.
Contributions: Motivated by the above analysis, we intro-duce Neural Deformable Anchor (NeuDA), a new neural implicit representation for high-fidelity surface reconstruc-tion leveraging multi-level voxel grids. Specifically, we store the 3D position, namely the anchor point, instead of the regular embedding (or feature) at each vertex. The input feature for a query point is obtained by directly interpolating the frequency embedding of its eight adjacent anchors. The anchor points are optimized through backpropagation, thus would show flexibility in modeling different fine-grained geometric structures. Moreover, drawing inspiration that high-frequency geometry and texture are likely encoded by the finest grid level, we present a simple yet effective hier-archical positional encoding policy that adopts a higher fre-quency band to a finer grid level. Experiments on DTU [8] and BlendedMVS [32] shows that NeuDA is superior in re-covering high-quality geometry with fine-grains details in comparison with baselines and SOTA methods. It’s worth mentioning that NeuDA employs a shallower MLP (4 vs. 8 for NeuS and volSDF) to achieve better surface reconstruc-tion performance due to the promising scene representation capability of the hierarchical deformable anchor structure. 2.