Abstract 1.

Introduction
Neural surface reconstruction has been shown to be pow-erful for recovering dense 3D surfaces via image-based neu-ral rendering. However, current methods struggle to recover detailed structures of real-world scenes. To address the issue, we present Neuralangelo, which combines the rep-resentation power of multi-resolution 3D hash grids with neural surface rendering. Two key ingredients enable our ap-proach: (1) numerical gradients for computing higher-order derivatives as a smoothing operation and (2) coarse-to-fine optimization on the hash grids controlling different levels of details. Even without auxiliary inputs such as depth, Neu-ralangelo can effectively recover dense 3D surface structures from multi-view images with fidelity significantly surpass-ing previous methods, enabling detailed large-scale scene reconstruction from RGB video captures. 3D surface reconstruction aims to recover dense geomet-ric scene structures from multiple images observed at differ-ent viewpoints [9]. The recovered surfaces provide structural information useful for many downstream applications, such as 3D asset generation for augmented/virtual/mixed real-ity or environment mapping for autonomous navigation of robotics. Photogrammetric surface reconstruction using a monocular RGB camera is of particular interest, as it equips users with the capability of casually creating digital twins of the real world using ubiquitous mobile devices.
Classically, multi-view stereo algorithms [6, 16, 29, 34] had been the method of choice for sparse 3D reconstruc-tion. An inherent drawback of these algorithms, however, is their inability to handle ambiguous observations, e.g. regions with large areas of homogeneous colors, repetitive texture
patterns, or strong color variations. This would result in inaccurate reconstructions with noisy or missing surfaces.
Recently, neural surface reconstruction methods [36, 41, 42] have shown great potential in addressing these limitations.
This new class of methods uses coordinate-based multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) to represent the scene as an implicit function, such as occupancy fields [25] or signed distance functions (SDF) [36, 41, 42]. Leveraging the inherent con-tinuity of MLPs and neural volume rendering [22], these techniques allow the optimized surfaces to meaningfully in-terpolate between spatial locations, resulting in smooth and complete surface representations.
Despite the superiority of neural surface reconstruction methods over classical approaches, the recovered fidelity of current methods does not scale well with the capacity of
MLPs. Recently, Müller et al. [23] proposed a new scalable representation, referred to as Instant NGP (Neural Graphics
Primitives). Instant NGP introduces a hybrid 3D grid struc-ture with a multi-resolution hash encoding and a lightweight
MLP that is more expressive with a memory footprint log-linear to the resolution. The proposed hybrid representation greatly increases the representation power of neural fields and has achieved great success at representing very fine-grained details for a wide variety of tasks, such as object shape representation and novel view synthesis problems.
In this paper, we propose Neuralangelo for high-fidelity surface reconstruction (Fig. 1). Neuralangelo adopts In-stant NGP as a neural SDF representation of the underlying 3D scene, optimized from multi-view image observations via neural surface rendering [36]. We present two findings central to fully unlocking the potentials of multi-resolution hash encodings. First, using numerical gradients to compute higher-order derivatives, such as surface normals for the eikonal regularization [8, 12, 20, 42], is critical to stabilizing the optimization. Second, a progressive optimization sched-ule plays an important role in recovering the structures at different levels of details. We combine these two key ingredi-ents and, via extensive experiments on standard benchmarks and real-world scenes, demonstrate significant improvements over image-based neural surface reconstruction methods in both reconstruction accuracy and view synthesis quality.
In summary, we present the following contributions:
• We present the Neuralangelo framework to naturally incorporate the representation power of multi-resolution hash encoding [23] into neural SDF representations.
• We present two simple techniques to improve the quality of hash-encoded surface reconstruction: higher-order derivatives with numerical gradients and coarse-to-fine optimization with a progressive level of details.
• We empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of Neu-ralangelo on various datasets, showing significant im-provements over previous methods. 2.