Abstract
We present a novel method to provide efﬁcient and highly detailed reconstructions. Inspired by wavelets, we learn a neural ﬁeld that decompose the signal both spatially and frequency-wise. We follow the recent grid-based paradigm for spatial decomposition, but unlike existing work, encour-age speciﬁc frequencies to be stored in each grid via Fourier features encodings. We then apply a multi-layer perceptron with sine activations, taking these Fourier encoded features in at appropriate layers so that higher-frequency compo-nents are accumulated on top of lower-frequency compo-nents sequentially, which we sum up to form the ﬁnal out-put. We demonstrate that our method outperforms the state of the art regarding model compactness and convergence speed on multiple tasks: 2D image ﬁtting, 3D shape recon-struction, and neural radiance ﬁelds. Our code is available at https://github.com/ubc-vision/NFFB. 1.

Introduction
Neural ﬁelds [59] have recently been shown to be highly effective for various tasks ranging from 2D image com-pression [10, 64], image translation [4, 49], 3D reconstruc-tion [41, 48], to neural rendering [1, 36, 37]. Since the in-troduction of early methods [36, 38, 48], efforts have been made to make neural ﬁelds more efﬁcient and scalable.
Among various extensions, we are interested in two partic-ular directions: those that utilize spatial decomposition in the form of grids [7,37,51] that allow fast training and level of detail; and those that encode the inputs to neural ﬁelds with high-dimensional features via frequency transforma-tion such as periodic sinusoidal representations [36, 47, 53] that ﬁght the inherent bias of neural ﬁelds that is to-wards low-frequency data [53]. The former drastically re-duced the training time allowing various new application areas [11, 52, 58, 60], while the latter has now become a standard operation when applying neural ﬁelds.
While these two developments have become popular, a caveat in existing works is that they do not consider the two together—all grids are treated similarly and interpreted to-gether by a neural network. We argue that this is an impor-tant oversight that has a critical outcome. For a model to be efﬁcient and accurate, different grid resolutions should focus on different frequency components that are properly localized. While existing grid methods that naturally local-X
+
X
Low Frequency Filter
High Frequency Filter
+
X
+
Figure 2. A wavelet-inspired framework – In our framework, given a position x, low- and high-frequency ﬁlters are used to de-compose the signal, which is then reconstructed by accumulating them and using the intermediate outputs as shown. Here, we uti-lize a multi-scale grid to act as if they store these high-frequency
ﬁltering outcomes at various spatially decomposed locations. ize signals—can learn to perform this frequency decompo-sition, relying purely on learning may lead to sub-optimal results as shown in Fig. 1. This is also true when locality is not considered, as shown by the SIREN [47] example.
Explicit consideration of both together is hence important.
This caveat remains true even for methods that utilize both grids and frequency encodings for the input coordi-nates [37] as grids and frequency are not linked, and it is up to the deep networks to ﬁnd out the relationship between the two. Thus, there has also been work that focuses on jointly considering both space and frequency [18, 34], but these methods are not designed with multiple scales in mind thus single-scale and are designed to be non-scalable. In other words, they can be thought of as being similar to short-time
Fourier transform in signal processing.
Therefore, in this work, we propose a novel neural ﬁeld framework that decomposes the target signal in both space and frequency domains simultaneously, analogous to the traditional wavelet decomposition [46]; see Fig. 1. Speciﬁ-cally, a signal is decomposed jointly in space and frequency through low- and high-frequency ﬁlters as shown in Fig. 2.
Here, our core idea is to realize these ﬁlters conceptually as a neural network. We implement the low-frequency path in the form of Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLP), leveraging their frequency bias [53]. For the high-frequency compo-nents, we implement them as lookup operations on grids, as the grid features can explicitly enforce locality over a small spatial area and facilitate learning of these components.
This decomposition is much resemblant of ﬁlter banks in signal processing, thus we name our method neural Fourier
ﬁlter bank.
In more detail, we utilize the multi-scale grid structure as in [20,37,51], but with a twist—we apply frequency encod-ing in the form of Fourier Features just before the grid fea-tures are used. By doing so, we convert the linear change in grid features that arise from bilinear/trilinear interpolation to appropriate frequencies that should be learned at each scale level. We then compose these grid features together through an MLP with sine activation functions, which takes these features as input at each layer, forming a pipeline that sequentially accumulates higher-frequency information as composition is performed as shown in Fig. 2. To facilitate training, we initialize each layer of the MLP with the target frequency band in mind. Finally, we sum up all intermedi-ate outputs together to form the estimated ﬁeld value.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method under three different tasks: 2D image ﬁtting, 3D shape reconstruc-tion, and Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF). We show that our method achieves a better trade-off between the model com-pactness versus reconstruction quality than the state of the arts. We further perform an extensive ablation study to ver-ify where the gains are coming from.
To summarize, our contributions are as follows:
• we propose a novel framework that decomposes the mod-eled signal both spatially and frequency-wise;
• we show that our method achieves better trade-off be-tween quality and memory on 2D image ﬁtting, 3D shape reconstruction, and Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF);
• we provide an extensive ablation study shedding insight into the details of our method. 2.