Abstract
With the progress of 3D human pose and shape estima-tion, state-of-the-art methods can either be robust to oc-clusions or obtain pixel-aligned accuracy in non-occlusion cases. However, they cannot obtain robustness and mesh-image alignment at the same time. In this work, we present
NIKI (Neural Inverse Kinematics with Invertible Neural
Network), which models bi-directional errors to improve the robustness to occlusions and obtain pixel-aligned ac-curacy. NIKI can learn from both the forward and inverse processes with invertible networks. In the inverse process, the model separates the error from the plausible 3D pose manifold for a robust 3D human pose estimation.
In the forward process, we enforce the zero-error boundary condi-tions to improve the sensitivity to reliable joint positions for better mesh-image alignment. Furthermore, NIKI emulates the analytical inverse kinematics algorithms with the twist-and-swing decomposition for better interpretability. Ex-periments on standard and occlusion-specific benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of NIKI, where we exhibit ro-bust and well-aligned results simultaneously. Code is avail-able at https://github.com/Jeff-sjtu/NIKI. 1.

Introduction
Recovering 3D human pose and shape (HPS) from
It has many monocular input is a challenging problem. applications [9, 31, 43, 56, 57, 59, 60]. Despite the rapid progress powered by deep neural networks [17, 21, 22, 24, 29, 62], the performance of existing methods is not satisfac-tory in complex real-world applications where people are often occluded and truncated by themselves, each other, and objects.
*Equal contribution.
†Cewu Lu is the corresponding author. He is the member of Qing Yuan
Research Institute, Qi Zhi Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelli-gence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China.
Figure 1. Trade-off between pixel-aligned accuracy and robust-ness. From 3DPW to 3DPW-XOCC, the degree of occlusion in-creases. The pixel-aligned approach performs well only in non-occlusion cases. The direct regression approach is more robust to occlusions but less accurate in non-occlusion cases. NIKI shows high accuracy and strong robustness simultaneously. Illustrative results on the 3DPW-XOCC dataset are shown on the right.
Existing state-of-the-art approaches rely on pixel-aligned local evidence, e.g., 3D keypoints [14, 29], mesh vertices [37], and mesh-aligned features [62], to perform ac-curate human pose and shape estimation. Although the lo-cal evidence helps obtain high accuracy in standard bench-marks, it fails when the mesh-image correspondences are unavailable due to occlusions and truncations. These pixel-aligned approaches sacrifice robustness to occlusions for high accuracy in non-occlusion scenarios. On the other hand, direct regression approaches are more robust to oc-clusions. Such approaches directly predict a set of pose and shape parameters with neural networks. By encoding human body priors in the networks, they predict a more physiologically plausible result than the pixel-aligned ap-proaches in severely occluded scenarios. However, direct regression approaches use all pixels to predict human pose and shape, which is a highly non-linear mapping and suf-fers from image-mesh misalignment. Recent work [19, 22] adopts guided attention to leverage local evidence for better alignment. Nevertheless, in non-occlusion scenarios, direct regression approaches are still not as accurate as the pixel-aligned approaches that explicitly model the local evidence.
Fig. 1 shows the performance of the state-of-the-art pixel-aligned and regression approaches in scenarios with differ-ent levels of occlusions. These two types of approaches cannot achieve mesh-image alignment and robustness at the same time.
In this work, we propose NIKI, a Neural Inverse Kine-matics (IK) algorithm with Invertible neural networks, to improve robustness to occlusions while maintaining pixel-IK algorithms are widely adopted in aligned accuracy. pixel-aligned approaches [14, 29] to obtain mesh-image alignment in non-occlusion scenarios. However, existing
IK algorithms only focus on estimating the body part ro-tations that best explain the joint positions but do not con-sider the plausibility of the estimated poses. Therefore, the output human pose inherits the errors from joint position estimation, which is especially severe in occlusion scenar-ios. In contrast, NIKI is robust to unreliable joint positions by modeling the bi-directional pose error. We build the bi-jective mapping between the Euclidean joint position space and the combined space of the 3D joint rotation and the la-tent error. The latent error indicates how the joint positions deviate from the manifold of plausible human poses. The output rotations are robust to erroneous joint positions since we have explicitly removed the error information by super-vising the output marginal distribution in the inverse direc-tion. In the forward direction, we introduce the zero-error boundary conditions, which enforce the solved rotations to explain the reliable joint positions and improve mesh-image alignment. The invertible neural network (INN) is trained in both forward and inverse directions. Since forward kine-matics (FK) is deterministic and easy to understand, it aids the INN in learning the complex IK process through inher-ent bijective mapping. To further improve the interpretabil-ity of the IK network, we emulate the analytical IK algo-rithm by decomposing the complete rotation into the twist rotation and the swing-dependent joint position with two consecutive invertible networks.
We benchmark NIKI on 3DPW [51], AGORA [40], 3DOH [63], 3DPW-OCC [51], and our proposed 3DPW-XOCC datasets. 3DPW-XOCC is augmented from the orig-inal 3DPW dataset with extremely challenging occlusions and truncations. NIKI shows robust reconstructions while maintaining pixel-aligned accuracy, demonstrating state-of-the-art performance in both occlusions and non-occlusion benchmarks. The main contributions of this paper are sum-marized as follows:
• We present a framework with a novel error-aware in-verse kinematics algorithm that is robust to occlusions while maintaining pixel-aligned accuracy.
• We propose to decouple the error information from plausible human poses by learning a pose-independent error embedding in the inverse process and enforc-ing zero-error boundary conditions during the forward process using invertible neural networks.
• Our approach outperforms previous pixel-aligned and direct regression approaches on both occlusions and non-occlusion benchmarks. 2.