Abstract
Despite the success of multimodal learning in cross-modal retrieval task, the remarkable progress relies on the correct correspondence among multimedia data. How-ever, collecting such ideal data is expensive and time-consuming. In practice, most widely used datasets are har-vested from the Internet and inevitably contain mismatched pairs. Training on such noisy correspondence datasets causes performance degradation because the cross-modal retrieval methods can wrongly enforce the mismatched data to be similar. To tackle this problem, we propose a Meta
Similarity Correction Network (MSCN) to provide reliable similarity scores. We view a binary classification task as the meta-process that encourages the MSCN to learn dis-crimination from positive and negative meta-data. To fur-ther alleviate the influence of noise, we design an effective data purification strategy using meta-data as prior knowl-edge to remove the noisy samples. Extensive experiments are conducted to demonstrate the strengths of our method in both synthetic and real-world noises, including Flickr30K,
MS-COCO, and Conceptual Captions. Our code is publicly available.1 1.

Introduction
Recently, cross-modal retrieval has drawn much atten-tion with the rapid growth of multimedia data. Given a query sample of specific modality, cross-modal retrieval aims to retrieve relevant samples across different modali-ties. Existing cross-modal retrieval works [1, 6, 11] usu-ally learn a comparable common space to bridge different modalities, which achieved remarkable progress in many applications, including video-audio retrieval [1, 33], visual question answering [11, 26], and image-text matching [44].
Despite the promise, a core assumption in cross-modal is the correct correspondence among multiple retrieval
*Minnan Luo is the corresponding author. 1https://github.com/hhc1997/MSCN
Figure 1. Illustration of noisy correspondence in image-text re-trieval. A standard triplet loss is used to enforce the positive pairs to be closer than negatives in the common space. Noisy correspon-dence is the mismatched pairs but wrongly considered as positive ones, and thus results in model performance degradation. modalities. However, collecting such ideal data is expen-sive and time-consuming.
In practice, most widely used datasets are harvested from the Internet and inevitably con-tain noisy correspondence [31]. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the cross-modal retrieval method will wrongly enforce the mis-matched data to be similar when learning with noisy corre-spondence, which may significantly affect the retrieval per-formance. To date, few effort has been made to address this. Huang [15] first researches this issue and proposes the
NCR method to train from the noisy image-text pairs ro-bustly. Inspired by the prior success for noisy labels [20],
NCR divides the data into clean and noisy partitions and rectifies the correspondence with an adaptive model. How-ever, NCR based on the memorization effect of DNNs [3], which leads to poor performance under high noise ratio.
To tackle the challenge, we propose a Meta Similarity
Correction Network (MSCN) which aims to provide reli-able similarity scores for the noisy features from main net.
We view a binary classification task as the meta-process: given a multimodal sample, the MSCN will learn to deter-mine whether the modalities correspond to each other or not, where the prediction of MSCN can be naturally re-garded as the similarity score. Specifically, a small amount of clean pairs is used to construct positive and negative meta-data, both viewed as meta-knowledge that encourages
MSCN to learn the discrimination. Meanwhile, the main net
trained by the corrected similarity score from MSCN with a self-adaptive margin to achieve robust learning. This inter-dependency makes the main net and MSCN benefits each other against noise. However, due to the property of triplet loss, it remains to produce positive loss for noisy pairs even if we employ the ideal similarity scores. To this end, we further propose a meta-knowledge guided data purification strategy to remove samples with potentially wrong corre-spondence. Extensive experiments are conducted to demon-strate the strengths of our method in both synthetic and real-world noises.
The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
• We pioneer the exploration of meta-learning for noisy correspondence problem, where a meta correction net-work is proposed to provide reliable similarity scores against noise.
• We present a novel meta-process that first considers both positive and negative data as meta-knowledge to encourage the MSCN to learn discrimination from them.
• We design an effective data purification strategy us-ing meta-data as prior knowledge to remove the noisy samples. 2.