Abstract
Kalman filter (KF) based methods for multi-object track-ing (MOT) make an assumption that objects move linearly.
While this assumption is acceptable for very short peri-ods of occlusion, linear estimates of motion for prolonged time can be highly inaccurate. Moreover, when there is no measurement available to update Kalman filter param-eters, the standard convention is to trust the priori state estimations for posteriori update. This leads to the accu-mulation of errors during a period of occlusion. The er-ror causes significant motion direction variance in prac-tice. In this work, we show that a basic Kalman filter can still obtain state-of-the-art tracking performance if proper care is taken to fix the noise accumulated during occlu-sion.
Instead of relying only on the linear state estimate (i.e., estimation-centric approach), we use object observa-tions (i.e., the measurements by object detector) to compute a virtual trajectory over the occlusion period to fix the error accumulation of filter parameters. This allows more time steps to correct errors accumulated during occlusion. We name our method Observation-Centric SORT (OC-SORT).
It remains Simple, Online, and Real-Time but improves ro-bustness during occlusion and non-linear motion. Given off-the-shelf detections as input, OC-SORT runs at 700+
FPS on a single CPU. It achieves state-of-the-art on multi-ple datasets, including MOT17, MOT20, KITTI, head track-ing, and especially DanceTrack where the object motion is highly non-linear. The code and models are available at https://github.com/noahcao/OC_SORT. 1.

Introduction
We aim to develop a motion model-based multi-object tracking (MOT) method that is robust to occlusion and non-linear motion. Most existing motion model-based algo-rithms assume that the tracking targets have a constant ve-locity within a time interval, which is called the linear mo-tion assumption. This assumption breaks in many practical scenarios, but it still works because when the time interval is small enough, the object’s motion can be reasonably ap-(a) SORT (b) The proposed OC-SORT
Figure 1. Samples from the results on DanceTrack [54].
SORT and OC-SORT use the same detection results. On the third frame, SORT encounters an ID switch for the backflip target while OC-SORT tracks it consistently. proximated as linear. In this work, we are motivated by the fact that most of the errors from motion model-based track-ing methods occur when occlusion and non-linear motion happen together. To mitigate the adverse effects caused, we first rethink current motion models and recognize some lim-itations. Then, we propose addressing them for more robust tracking performance, especially in occlusion.
As the main branch of motion model-based tracking, filtering-based methods assume a transition function to pre-dict the state of objects on future time steps, which are called state “estimations”. Besides estimations, they lever-age an observation model, such as an object detector, to derive the state measurements of target objects, also called
“observations”. Observations usually serve as auxiliary in-formation to help update the posteriori parameters of the filter. The trajectories are still extended by the state estima-tions. Among this line of work, the most widely used one is SORT [3], which uses a Kalman filter (KF) to estimate object states and a linear motion function as the transition
function between time steps. However, SORT shows insuf-ficient tracking robustness when the object motion is non-linear, and no observations are available when updating the filter posteriori parameters.
In this work, we recognize three limitations of SORT.
First, although the high frame rate is the key to approximat-ing the object motion as linear, it also amplifies the model’s sensitivity to the noise of state estimations. Specifically, be-tween consecutive frames of a high frame-rate video, we demonstrate that the noise of displacement of the object can be of the same magnitude as the actual object displacement, leading to the estimated object velocity by KF suffering from a significant variance. Also, the noise in the veloc-ity estimate will accumulate into the position estimate by the transition process. Second, the noise of state estima-tions by KF is accumulated along the time when there is no observation available in the update stage of KF. We show that the error accumulates very fast with respect to the time of the target object’s being untracked. The noise’s influence on the velocity direction often makes the track lost again even after re-association. Last, given the development of modern detectors, the object state by detections usually has lower variance than the state estimations propagated along time steps by a fixed transition function in filters. However,
SORT is designed to prolong the object trajectories by state estimations instead of observations.
To relieve the negative effect of these limitations, we pro-pose two main innovations in this work. First, we design a module to use object state observations to reduce the accu-mulated error during the track’s being lost in a backcheck fashion. To be precise, besides the traditional stages of pre-dict and update, we add a stage of re-update to correct the accumulated error. The re-update is triggered when a track is re-activated by associating to an observation after a period of being untracked. The re-update uses virtual observations on the historical time steps to prevent error accumulation.
The virtual observations come from a trajectory generated using the last-seen observation before untracked and the lat-est observation re-activating this track as anchors. We name it Observation-centric Re-Update (ORU).
Besides ORU, the assumption of linear motion provides the consistency of the object motion direction. But this cue is hard to be used in SORT’s association because of the heavy noise in direction estimation. But we propose an observation-centric manner to incorporate the direction consistency of tracks in the cost matrix for the association.
We name it Observation-Centric Momentum (OCM). We also provide analytical justification for the noise of veloc-ity direction estimation in practice.
The proposed method, named as Observation-Centric
SORT or OC-SORT in short, remains simple, online, real-time and significantly improves robustness over occlusion and non-linear motion. Our contributions are summarized as the following: 1. We recognize, analytically and empirically, three lim-itations of SORT, i.e. sensitivity to the noise of state estimations, error accumulation over time, and being estimation-centric; 2. We propose OC-SORT for tracking under occlusion and non-linear motion by fixing SORT’s limitations.
It achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple datasets in an online and real-time fashion. 2.