Abstract
We address the problem of surface reconstruction from unoriented point clouds.
Implicit neural representations (INRs) have become popular for this task, but when infor-mation relating to the inside versus outside of a shape is not available (such as shape occupancy, signed distances or surface normal orientation) optimization relies on heuris-tics and regularizers to recover the surface. These meth-ods can be slow to converge and easily get stuck in local minima. We propose a two-step approach, OG-INR, where we (1) construct a discrete octree and label what is inside and outside (2) optimize for a continuous and high-fidelity shape using an INR that is initially guided by the octree’s labelling. To solve for our labelling, we propose an en-ergy function over the discrete structure and provide an ef-ficient move-making algorithm that explores many possible labellings. Furthermore we show that we can easily inject knowledge into the discrete octree, providing a simple way to influence the result from the continuous INR. We evaluate the effectiveness of our approach on two unoriented surface reconstruction datasets and show competitive performance compared to other unoriented, and some oriented, methods.
Our results show that the exploration by the move-making algorithm avoids many of the bad local minima reached by purely gradient descent optimized methods (see Figure 1). 1.

Introduction
Surface reconstruction from 3D point clouds has been studied extensively in computer vision and computer graph-ics. The task requires estimating a mesh of the shape’s sur-face from a point cloud sampled from the surface of the shape. We focus on the reconstruction of watertight 3D shapes, i.e., shapes that have a well defined interior and ex-terior. Such shapes are often represented as signed distance fields (SDFs) or occupancy fields, which can be efficiently encoded by a neural network [28, 30]. As these representa-tions are fields parameterized by neural networks, they are often called neural fields. Furthermore, they implicitly rep-Figure 1. Our method with a SIREN INR (OG-SIREN, left) com-pared to SIREN wo n (right) for two shapes from the ShapeNet dataset. Our octree guidance allows for consistent inside-outside determinism. On the other hand, SIREN wo n gets stuck in lo-cal minima from which it cannot escape (due to needing to com-pletely change the occupancy of certain areas) creating extraneous surfaces (often called ghost geometries in the literature). resent the shape by a level set of the field, thus they are also often referred to as implicit neural representations (INRs).
The broader class of neural fields, including INRs, have been very popular over the last few years as they can handle arbitrary topology, are memory efficient, and are continu-ous with potentially infinite resolution [39, 46]. Among the
INRs for 3D shapes, SDFs are the most popular as they pro-vide more useful information (distances not just occupancy) and are required for downstream graphics algorithms such as sphere tracing and approximate soft shadows [29, 35].
When learning an implicit representation of a shape, a major difficulty is predicting whether points in space are inside or outside the shape. Many methods require ori-ented surface normals for the input points or signed dis-tances from the surface, which usually are not given by raw data from scans. While this can be estimated using the line of sight information [17] or algorithms [4, 6, 15, 21], they yield noisy predictions that after postprocessing still can lead to bad results (see Section 4.4). We consider the task of unoriented surface reconstruction, where such informa-tion is not available, and only the sampled surface points are given. We demonstrate that our method performs com-petitively and sometimes better than oriented methods, even when they are given the ground truth (GT) normals.
Figure 2. An illustration of our method, OG-INR. Given an unoriented point cloud (left), we progressively build and label an octree around the points (middle). The octree at depths 3-7 are shown. Surface leaves of the octree (yellow) are leaves that contain points from the point cloud, other leaves are labelled as inside (blue) or outside (transparent) by minimizing an energy function. We then train an INR model to obtain an SDF, using the labelling as supervision for the initial training, after which we can extract a mesh (right).
We propose OG-INR, which uses a discrete representa-tion in conjunction with the continuous INR representation (see Figure 2). Given an input unoriented point cloud, we progressively build an octree from the input points and de-termine which leaf nodes are surface leaves (i.e., leaves that contain a point). We also label all other leaves as inside or outside leaves (if they should be within or outside the shape respectively). To do this we minimize an energy function that trades off the watertight surface property, that every surface point should border with the inside and outside of the shape, with a minimal surface constraint. We then train standard INR architectures, initially guiding the training by the octree labelling, and show that the INR converges much faster and is less prone to large failure regions.
Our main contributions are:
• We introduce a novel method to guide the initial stage of INR training. It uses a labelled octree structure to allow the INR to converge significantly faster and alle-viates the local minima problem of INRs.
• We propose an energy function over octree labels that captures the task of surface reconstruction. It balances the constraint of maintaining known surface regions with minimising the overall surface area.
• We provide an efficient move-making algorithm to optimize the energy function, which explores many inside-outside possibilities in a structured manner.
• Our discrete representation is easily understandable and human-modifiable, giving an intuitive method for applying changes to the resulting SDF. 2.