Abstract
Visual recognition tasks are often limited to dealing with a small subset of classes simply because the labels for the remaining classes are unavailable. We are interested in identifying novel concepts in a dataset through represen-tation learning based on both labeled and unlabeled ex-amples, and extending the horizon of recognition to both known and novel classes. To address this challenging task, we propose a combinatorial learning approach, which natu-rally clusters the examples in unseen classes using the com-positional knowledge given by multiple supervised meta-classiﬁers on heterogeneous label spaces. The representa-tions given by the combinatorial embedding are made more robust by unsupervised pairwise relation learning. The proposed algorithm discovers novel concepts via a joint optimization for enhancing the discrimitiveness of unseen classes as well as learning the representations of known classes generalizable to novel ones. Our extensive exper-iments demonstrate remarkable performance gains by the proposed approach on public datasets for image retrieval and image categorization with novel class discovery. 1.

Introduction
Despite the remarkable success of machine learning fu-eled by deep neural networks, existing frameworks still have critical limitations in an open-world setting, where some categories are not deﬁned a priori and the labels for some classes are missing. Although there have been a grow-ing number of works that identify new classes in unlabeled data given a set of labeled examples [4, 5, 15–18], they of-ten assume that all the unlabeled examples belong to unseen classes and/or the number of novel classes is known in ad-vance, which makes their problem settings unrealistic.
To address the limitations, this paper introduces an al-gorithm applicable to a more realistic setting. We aim to discover and learn the representations of unseen categories without any prior information or supervision about novel classes, where unlabeled data may contain examples in both seen and unseen classes. This task requires the model to be able to effectively identify unseen classes while preserving the information of previously seen classes. Our problem setting is more challenging than the case where the unla-beled data only consist of unseen classes because we have to solve an additional problem, predicting the membership of unlabeled examples between seen and unseen classes.
We propose a representation learning approach based on the concept of combinatorial classiﬁcation [36], where the examples in unseen categories are identiﬁed by the com-position of multiple meta-classiﬁers. Figure 1 illustrates the main idea of our combinatorial embedding framework, which forms partitions for novel classes via a combination of multiple classiﬁers for the meta-classes involving several constituent base classes. Images in the same meta-class po-tentially have common attributes that are helpful for knowl-edge transfer to novel classes, and we learn the representa-tions of the images by the proposed combinatorial embed-ding. The learned representations via the combinatorial em-bedding become even stronger by unsupervised pairwise re-lation learning, which is effective to identify novel classes.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows.
• We propose a novel combinatorial learning framework, which embeds the examples in both seen and novel classes effectively by the composition of the knowl-edge learned from multiple heterogeneous meta-class classiﬁers.
• We introduce an unsupervised learning approach to de-ﬁne pairwise relations, especially semantic structure between labeled and unlabeled examples, which fur-ther improves the quality of the representations given by combinatorial embedding.
• We demonstrate the outstanding performance of our model in the presence of novel classes through exten-sive evaluations on image retrieval and image catego-rization with novel class discovery benchmarks.
In the rest of this paper, we ﬁrst review related works in
Section 2 and discusses our main algorithm in Section 3.
Section 4 presents our experimental results and Section 5 concludes this paper.
(a) One meta-class set (b) Two meta-class sets (c) Three meta-class sets
Figure 1. Conceptual illustration of decision boundaries (black solid lines) given by combinatorial classiﬁcation with three seen classes, where three binary meta-classiﬁers are added one-by-one from (a) to (c). Unlike the standard classiﬁer that creates decision boundaries for seen classes only, the combinatorial classiﬁcation based on multiple coarse-grained classiﬁers creates and reserves partitions, which are distinct from those of seen classes, potentially corresponding to novel concepts. 2.