Abstract
By integrating certain optimization solvers with deep neural networks, deep unfolding network (DUN) with good interpretability and high performance has attracted grow-ing attention in compressive sensing (CS). However, exist-ing DUNs often improve the visual quality at the price of a large number of parameters and have the problem of fea-In this paper, we ture information loss during iteration. propose an Optimization-inspired Cross-attention Trans-former (OCT) module as an iterative process, leading to a lightweight OCT-based Unfolding Framework (OCTUF) for image CS. Speciﬁcally, we design a novel Dual Cross At-tention (Dual-CA) sub-module, which consists of an Inertia-Supplied Cross Attention (ISCA) block and a Projection-Guided Cross Attention (PGCA) block. ISCA block intro-duces multi-channel inertia forces and increases the mem-ory effect by a cross attention mechanism between adja-cent iterations. And, PGCA block achieves an enhanced information interaction, which introduces the inertia force into the gradient descent step through a cross attention block. Extensive CS experiments manifest that our OCTUF achieves superior performance compared to state-of-the-art methods while training lower complexity. Codes are avail-able at https : / / github . com / songjiechong /
OCTUF. 1.

Introduction
Compressive sensing (CS) is a considerable research in-terest from signal/image processing communities as a joint acquisition and reconstruction approach [5]. The signal is
ﬁrst sampled and compressed simultaneously with linear random transformations. Then, the original signal can be re-constructed from far fewer measurements than that required
∗Corresponding author. This work was supported in part by Shen-zhen Research Project under Grant JCYJ20220531093215035 and Grant
JSGGZD20220822095800001.
Figure 1. The PSNR (dB) performance (y-axis) of our OCTUF and some recent methods (ISTA-Net [54], DPA-Net [44], AMP-Net [60], MAC-Net [19], COAST [53], MADUN [41], CASNet
[7], TransCS [39], FSOINet [10], MR-CCSNet [16]) under differ-ent parameter capacities (x-axis) on Set11 [24] dataset in the case of CS ratio = 25%. Our proposed method outperforms previous methods while requiring signiﬁcantly cheaper parameters. by Nyquist sampling rate [29, 38]. So, the two main con-cerns of CS are the design of the sampling matrix [7, 16] and recovering the original signal [60], and our work fo-cuses on the latter. Meanwhile, the CS technology achieves great success in many image systems, including medical imaging [31, 45], single-pixel cameras [15, 37], wireless remote monitoring [59], and snapshot compressive imag-ing [4, 50, 51], because it can reduce the measurement and storage space while maintaining a reasonable reconstruction of the sparse or compressible signal.
Mathematically, a random linear measurement y ∈ RM can be formulated as y = Φx, where x ∈ RN is the origi-nal signal and Φ ∈ RM ×N is the measurement matrix with
M (cid:3) N . M
N is the CS ratio (or sampling rate). Obviously,
CS reconstruction is an ill-posed inverse problem. To ob-tain a reliable reconstruction, the conventional CS methods
commonly solve an energy function as: arg min x 1 2 (cid:4)Φx − y(cid:4)2 2 + λR(x), (1) 2 (cid:4)Φx − y(cid:4)2 where 1 2 denotes the data-ﬁdelity term for mod-eling the likelihood of degradation and λR(x) denotes the prior term with regularization parameter λ. For traditional model-based methods [17, 20, 26, 32, 56, 57, 64], the prior term can be the sparsifying operator corresponding to some pre-deﬁned transform basis, such as discrete cosine trans-form (DCT) and wavelet [61, 62]. They enjoy the merits of strong convergence and theoretical analysis in most cases but are usually limited in high computational complexity and low adaptivity [63]. Recently, fueled by the power-ful learning capacity of deep networks, several network-based CS algorithms have been proposed [24,44]. Although network-based methods can solve CS problem adaptively with fast inferences, the architectures of most of these meth-ods are the black box design and the advantages of tradi-tional algorithms are not fully considered [36].
More recently, some deep unfolding networks (DUNs) with good interpretability are proposed to combine network with optimization and train a truncated unfolding inference through an end-to-end learning manner, which has become the mainstream for CS [52–55, 60]. However, existing deep unfolding algorithms usually achieve excellent performance with a large number of iterations and a huge number of pa-rameters [41,42], which are easily limited by storage space.
Furthermore, the image-level transmission at each iteration fails to make full use of inter-stage feature information.
To address the above problems, in this paper, we propose an efﬁcient Optimization-inspired Cross-attention
Transformer (OCT) module as the iterative process and establish a lightweight OCT-based Unfolding Framework (OCTUF) for image CS, as shown in Fig. 2. Our OCT mod-ule maintains maximum information ﬂow in feature space, which consists of a Dual Cross Attention (Dual-CA) sub-module and a Feed-Forward Network (FFN) sub-module to form each iterative process. Dual-CA sub-module con-tains an Inertia-Supplied Cross Attention (ISCA) block and a Projection-Guided Cross Attention (PGCA) block. ISCA block calculates cross attention on adjacent iteration infor-mation and adds inertial/memory effect to the optimization algorithm. And, PGCA block uses the gradient descent step and inertial term as inputs of Cross Attention (CA) block to guide the ﬁne fusion of channel-wise features. With the proposed techniques, OCTUF outperforms state-of-the-art
CS methods with much fewer parameters, as illustrated in
Fig. 1. The main contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose a lightweight deep unfolding frame-work OCTUF in feature space for CS, where the optimization-inspired cross-attention Transformer (OCT) module is regarded as an iterative process.
• We design a compact Dual Cross Attention (Dual-CA) sub-module to guide the efﬁcient multi-channel infor-mation interactions, which consists of a Projection-Guided Cross Attention (PGCA) block and an Inertia-Supplied Cross Attention (ISCA) block.
• Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed
OCTUF outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods with cheaper computational and memory costs. 2.