Abstract
We introduce an interferometric technique for passive time-of-ﬂight imaging and depth sensing at micrometer ax-ial resolutions. Our technique uses a full-ﬁeld Michelson interferometer, modiﬁed to use sunlight as the only light source. The large spectral bandwidth of sunlight makes it possible to acquire micrometer-resolution time-resolved scene responses, through a simple axial scanning opera-tion. Additionally, the angular bandwidth of sunlight makes it possible to capture time-of-ﬂight measurements insensi-tive to indirect illumination effects, such as interreﬂections and subsurface scattering. We build an experimental pro-totype that we operate outdoors, under direct sunlight, and in adverse environment conditions such as machine vibra-tions and vehicle trafﬁc. We use this prototype to demon-strate, for the ﬁrst time, passive imaging capabilities such as micrometer-scale depth sensing robust to indirect illumi-nation, direct-only imaging, and imaging through diffusers. 1.

Introduction
The recovery of 3D information for an imaged scene is one of the core problems of optics, imaging, computer vi-sion, and other sciences. In particular, the ability to sense depth at axial resolutions of a few micrometers is of great importance for critical applications areas such as medicine, precision fabrication, material science, and robotics.
Existing contactless imaging techniques for micron-scale 3D sensing, such as interferometry and microscopy, require active illumination, most commonly from a coher-ent source. This makes these techniques impractical for use outdoors, in the presence of strong ambient illumination that overwhelms the active source, or in power-constrained applications. On the other hand, existing passive 3D sensing techniques, such as multi-view stereo, shape from shading, and depth from (de)focus, achieve resolutions of hundreds of micrometers at best, placing them out of scope for appli-cations requiring micron-scale resolutions.
We change this state of affairs by introducing a com-pletely passive micron-scale 3D sensing technique. Our technique is interferometric, and uses sunlight as the only light source, to capture full-frame time-of-ﬂight measure-ments at axial resolutions of 5 micrometers. Our technique additionally takes advantage of the spatial incoherence of sunlight, to enable robust 3D sensing in the presence of se-vere indirect illumination effects (interreﬂections, subsur-Figure 1. Using sunlight interferometry to passively recon-(a) and (b) show a schematic struct part of a circuit board. and photograph of the sunlight interferometer we build for passive time-of-ﬂight imaging. We use this system to reconstruct part of a Raspberry Pi circuit board that has multiple resistors, soldering pads, and tracks. (c) and (d) show a picture of the scene as seen through the imaging camera, along with an inset highlighting ﬁne geometric features. (e) shows the estimated depth map, and (f) and (g) the corresponding rendered 3D surface. Our technique re-constructs ﬁne features such as the PCB tracks and through-holes, despite operating outdoors under adverse environment conditions. face scattering), and even tasks such as imaging and 3D sensing through optically-thin scattering layers.
To demonstrate these capabilities, we build an exper-imental prototype that we operate outdoors, under direct sunlight and adverse experimental conditions (wind, ma-chine vibrations, vehicle trafﬁc). This is in stark contrast with previous demonstrations of interferometric sensing, which were only possible under carefully-controlled lab conditions (dark room, vibration-isolated optical tables, no air ﬂow). Even under these adverse conditions, our experi-ments show that it is possible to perform passive depth scan-ning, at pixel-level lateral resolution and micrometer ax-ial resolution, for objects that are challenging to scan even with active illumination techniques (translucent, metallic, occluded by thin scatterers). More broadly, our results open the door for the deployment of interferometric techniques in uncontrolled outdoor environments, and for the devel-opment of passive computational light transport capabili-ties such as direct-only imaging, imaging through scatter-ing, and transient imaging. To facilitate future research to-wards these directions, we provide setup details, reconstruc-tion code, and data in the supplement and project website.1
Potential impact. The ability to perform interferometry outdoors can be useful for applications such as ﬁeld in-spection (e.g., detecting tiny but dangerous defects on air-plane surfaces), ﬁeld robotics (e.g., high-resolution manip-ulation), and ﬁeld medicine (e.g., in battleﬁelds, disaster
In addition to environments, or impoverished regions). outdoor operation, all of these applications beneﬁt from passive operation: Removing the active source allows for lighter, lower-cost, and lower-power depth sensing, all fea-tures critical for ﬁeld operation—often requiring mobility, small form factors, and functionality under limited electric-ity access. This is particularly important considering that the source is typically the system component consuming the most power, and also one of the costliest and bulkiest. 2.