Abstract
Supervised neural networks are known to achieve excel-lent results in various image restoration tasks. However, such training requires datasets composed of pairs of cor-rupted images and their corresponding ground truth tar-gets. Unfortunately, such data is not available in many ap-plications. For the task of image denoising in which the noise statistics is unknown, several self-supervised training methods have been proposed for overcoming this difficulty.
Some of these require knowledge of the noise model, while others assume that the contaminating noise is uncorrelated, both assumptions are too limiting for many practical needs.
This work proposes a novel self-supervised training tech-nique suitable for the removal of unknown correlated noise.
The proposed approach neither requires knowledge of the noise model nor access to ground truth targets. The in-put to our algorithm consists of easily captured bursts of noisy shots. Our algorithm constructs artificial patch-craft images from these bursts by patch matching and stitching, and the obtained crafted images are used as targets for the training. Our method does not require registration of the images within the burst. We evaluate the proposed frame-work through extensive experiments with synthetic and real image noise. 1.

Introduction
Supervised neural networks have proven themselves powerful, achieving impressive results in solving image restoration problems (e.g., [14–16, 18, 33, 41–43]). In the commonly deployed supervised training for such tasks, one needs a dataset consisting of pairs of corrupted and ground truth images. The degraded images are fed to the network input, while the ground truth counterparts are used as guid-ing targets. When the degradation model is known and easy to implement, one can construct such a dataset by applying
This research was partially supported by the Israel Science Foundation (ISF) under Grant 335/18 and the Council For Higher Education - Planning
& Budgeting Committee. the degradation to clean images. However, a problem arises when the degradation model is unknown.
In such cases, while it is relatively easy to acquire distorted images, ob-taining their ground truth counterparts can be challenging.
For this reason, there is a need for self-supervised methods that use corrupted images only in the training phase. More on these methods is detailed in Section 2.
In this work we focus on the problem of image denoising with an unknown noise model. More specifically, we as-sume that the noise is additive, zero mean, but not necessar-ily Gaussian, and one that could be cross-channel and short-range spatially correlated1. We additionally assume that the noise is (mostly) independent of the image and nearly ho-mogeneous, i.e., having low to moderate spatially variant statistics. Examples of such noise could be Gaussian corre-lated noise or real image noise in digital cameras. Several recent papers propose methods for self-supervised training under similar such challenging conditions. However, they all assume an uncorrelated noise or a noise with a known model, thus limiting their coverage of the need posed.
This work proposes a novel self-supervised training framework for addressing the problem of image denois-ing of an unknown correlated noise. The proposed algo-rithm gets as input bursts of shots, where each frame in the burst captures nearly the same scene, up to moderate movements of the camera and objects. Such sequences of images are easily captured in many digital cameras. Our algorithm uses one image from the burst as the input, utiliz-ing the rest of the frames of the same burst for constructing (noisy) targets for training. For creating these target images, we harness the concept of patch-craft frames introduced in
PaCNet [35]. Similar to PaCNet, we split the input shot into fully overlapping patches. For each patch, we find its nearest neighbor within the rest of the burst images. Note that, unlike PaCNet, we strictly omit the input shot from the neighbor search. We proceed by building m patch-craft 1By short-term we refer to the case in which the auto-correlation func-tion decays fast, implying that only nearby noise pixels may be highly cor-related. The correlation range we consider is governed by the patch size in our algorithm - see Section 3 for more details.
images by stitching the found neighbor patches, where m is the patch size, and use these frames as denoising targets.
The above can be easily extended by using more than one nearest neighbor per patch, this way enriching dramatically the number of patch-craft frames and their diversity.
The proposed technique for creating artificial target im-ages is sensitive to the possibility of getting statistical de-pendency between the input and the target noise. To com-bat this flaw, we propose a method for statistical analysis of the target noise. This analysis suggests simple actions that reduce dependency between the target noise and the denoiser’s input, leading to a significant boost in perfor-mance. We evaluate the proposed framework through ex-tensive experiments with synthetic and real image noise, showing that the proposed framework outperforms leading self-supervised methods. To summarize, the contributions of this work are the following:
• We propose a novel self-supervised framework for training an image denoiser, where the noise may be cross-channel and short-range spatially correlated.
Our approach relies simply on the availability of bursts of noisy images; the ground truth is unavailable, and the noise model is unknown.
• We suggest a method for statistical analysis of the tar-get noise that leads to a boost in performance.
• We demonstrate superior denoising performance com-pared to leading alternative self-supervised denoising methods. 2.