Abstract
Train 30 min
Neural radiance-density ﬁeld methods have become in-creasingly popular for the task of novel-view rendering.
Their recent extension to hash-based positional encoding ensures fast training and inference with visually pleasing results. However, density-based methods struggle with re-covering accurate surface geometry. Hybrid methods alle-viate this issue by optimizing the density based on an un-derlying SDF. However, current SDF methods are overly smooth and miss ﬁne geometric details. In this work, we combine the strengths of these two lines of work in a novel hash-based implicit surface representation. We propose im-provements to the two areas by replacing the voxel hash en-coding with a permutohedral lattice which optimizes faster, especially for higher dimensions. We additionally propose a regularization scheme which is crucial for recovering high-frequency geometric detail. We evaluate our method on multiple datasets and show that we can recover geo-metric detail at the level of pores and wrinkles while us-ing only RGB images for supervision. Furthermore, us-ing sphere tracing we can render novel views at 30 fps on an RTX 3090. Code is publicly available at https:
//radualexandru.github.io/permuto_sdf 1.

Introduction
Accurate reconstruction geometry and appearance of scenes is an important component of many computer vision tasks [16,19,25,31]. Recent Neural Radiance Field (NeRF)-like models [3, 16, 18, 28] represent the scene as a density and radiance ﬁeld and, when supervised with enough input images, can render photorealistic novel views.
Works like INGP [18] further improve on NeRF by us-ing a hash-based positional encoding which results in fast training and visually pleasing results. However, despite the photorealistic renderings, the reconstructed scene geometry can deviate severally from the ground-truth. For example, objects with high specularity or view-dependent effects are
Multi-view images Rendered novel view
Geometry (SDF) 35 ms
Figure 1. Given multi-view images, we recover both high quality geometry as an implicit SDF and appearance which can be ren-dered in real-time. often reconstructed as a cloud of low density; untextured regions can have arbitrary density in the reconstruction.
Another line of recent methods tackles the issue of in-correct geometry by representing the surfaces of objects as binary occupancy [22] or Signed Distance Function (SDF) [30, 33]. This representation can also be optimized with volumetric rendering techniques that are supervised with RGB images. However, parametrization of the SDF as a single fully-connected Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) often leads to overly smooth geometry and color.
In this work, we propose PermutoSDF, a method that combines the strengths of hash-based encodings and im-plicit surfaces. We represent the scene as an SDF and a color ﬁeld, which we render using unbiased volumetric in-tegration [30]. A naive combination of these two methods would fail to reconstruct accurate surfaces however, since it lacks any inductive bias for the ambiguous cases like specu-lar or untextured surfaces. Attempting to regularize the SDF with a total variation loss or a curvature loss will produce a smoother geometry at the expense of losing smaller details.
In this work, we propose a regularization scheme that en-sures both smooth geometry where needed and also recon-struction of ﬁne details like pores and wrinkles. Further-more, we improve upon the voxel hashing method of INGP
by proposing permutohedral lattice hashing. The number of vertices per simplex (triangle, tetrahedron, . . . ) in this data structure scales linearly with dimensionality instead of exponentially as in the hyper-cubical voxel case. We show that the permutohedral lattice performs better than voxels for 3D reconstruction and 4D background estimation.
In summary our main contributions are:
• a novel framework for optimizing neural implicit sur-faces based on hash-encoding,
• an extension of hash encoding to a permutohedral lat-tice which scales linearly with the input dimensions and allows for faster optimization, and
• a regularization scheme that allows to recover accu-rate SDF geometry with a level of detail at the scale of pores and wrinkles. 2.