Abstract
With the vigorous development of computer vision, ori-ented object detection has gradually been featured. In this paper, a novel differentiable angle coder named phase-shifting coder (PSC) is proposed to accurately predict the orientation of objects, along with a dual-frequency version (PSCD). By mapping the rotational periodicity of differ-ent cycles into the phase of different frequencies, we pro-vide a unified framework for various periodic fuzzy prob-lems caused by rotational symmetry in oriented object de-tection. Upon such a framework, common problems in oriented object detection such as boundary discontinuity and square-like problems are elegantly solved in a unified form. Visual analysis and experiments on three datasets prove the effectiveness and the potentiality of our approach.
When facing scenarios requiring high-quality bounding boxes, the proposed methods are expected to give a com-petitive performance. The codes are publicly available at https://github.com/open-mmlab/mmrotate. 1.

Introduction
As a fundamental task in computer vision, object de-tection has been extensively studied. Early researches are mainly focused on horizontal object detection [33], on the ground that objects in natural scenes are usually oriented upward due to gravity. However, in other domains such as aerial images [2, 12, 20, 23, 25], scene text [7, 10, 13, 14, 34], and industrial inspection [11, 19], oriented bounding boxes are considered more preferable. Upon requirements in these scenarios, oriented object detection has gradually been fea-tured.
At present, several solutions around oriented object de-*Corresponding author is Feipeng Da. This work is supported by Spe-cial Project on Basic Research of Frontier Leading Technology of Jiangsu
Province of China (BK20192004C). tection have been developed, among which the most intu-itive way is to modify horizontal object detectors by adding an output channel to predict the orientation angle. Such a solution faces two problems: 1) Boundary problem [24]: Boundary discontinuity problem is often caused by angular periodicity. Assuming orientation −π/2 is equivalent to π/2, the network output is sometimes expected to be −π/2 and sometimes π/2 when facing the same input. Such a situation makes the network confused about in which way it should perform regression. 2) Square-like problem [27]: Square-like problem usu-ally occurs when a square bounding box cannot be uniquely defined. Specifically, a square box should be equivalent to a 90◦ rotated one, but the regression loss between them is high due to the inconsistency of angle parameters. Such ambiguity can also seriously confuse the network.
A more comprehensive introduction to these problems can be found in previous researches [25, 27]. Also, sev-eral methods have been proposed to address these problems, which will be reviewed in Sec. 2.
Through rethinking the above problems, we find that they can inherently be unified as rotationally symmetric problems (boundary under 180◦ and square-like under 90◦ rotation), which is quite similar to the periodic fuzzy prob-lem of the absolute phase acquisition [37] in optical mea-surement.
Inspired by this, we come up with an idea to utilize phase-shifting coding, a technique widely used in optical measurement [36], for angle prediction in oriented object detection. The technique has the potential to solve both boundary discontinuity and square-like problems: 1) Phase-shifting encodes the measured distance (or par-allax) into the periodic phase in optical measurement. The orientation angle can also be encoded into the periodic phase, and boundary discontinuity is thus inherently solved. 2) Phase-shifting also has the periodic fuzzy problem, which is similar to the square-like problem, and many solu-tions exist. For example, the dual-frequency phase-shifting
technique solves the periodic fuzzy problem by mixing phases of different frequencies (also known as phase un-wrapping [37]).
Motivations of this paper:
Based on the above analysis, we believe that the phase-shifting technique can be modified and adapted to oriented object detection. What is the principle of the phase-shifting angle coder? How to integrate this module into a deep neural network? Will this technique result in better perfor-mance? These questions are what this paper is for.
Contributions of this paper: 1) We are the first to utilize the phase-shifting coder to cope with the angle regression problem in the deep learning area. An integral and stable solution is elaborated on in this paper. Most importantly, the codes are well-written, publicly available, and with reproducible results. 2) The performance of the proposed methods is evalu-ated through extensive experiments. The experimental re-sults are of high quality—All the listed results are retested on identical environments to ensure fair comparisons (in-stead of copied from other papers).
The rest of this paper is organized as follows:
Section 2 reviews the related methods around oriented object detection. Section 3 describes the principles of the phase-shifting coder in detail. Section 4 conducts exper-iments on several datasets to evaluate the performance of the proposed methods. Section 5 concludes the paper. 2.