Abstract
Recent works have proposed to craft adversarial clothes for evading person detectors, while they are either only ef-fective at limited viewing angles or very conspicuous to hu-mans. We aim to craft adversarial texture for clothes based on 3D modeling, an idea that has been used to craft rigid adversarial objects such as a 3D-printed turtle. Unlike rigid objects, humans and clothes are non-rigid, leading to difﬁ-In order to craft natural-culties in physical realization. looking adversarial clothes that can evade person detectors at multiple viewing angles, we propose adversarial camou-ﬂage textures (AdvCaT) that resemble one kind of the typical textures of daily clothes, camouﬂage textures. We leverage the Voronoi diagram and Gumbel-softmax trick to param-eterize the camouﬂage textures and optimize the parame-ters via 3D modeling. Moreover, we propose an efﬁcient augmentation pipeline on 3D meshes combining topologi-cally plausible projection (TopoProj) and Thin Plate Spline (TPS) to narrow the gap between digital and real-world ob-jects. We printed the developed 3D texture pieces on fabric materials and tailored them into T-shirts and trousers. Ex-periments show high attack success rates of these clothes against multiple detectors. 1.

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks(DNNs) have been widely used in many real-world systems such as face recognition and ob-ject detection [31, 32, 36, 48]. However, it is well known
∗Equal contribution.
†Corresponding author.
Figure 1. Visualization of several adversarial clothes. (a) Adver-(c) Naturalistic (b) Adversarial T-shirt [43]. sarial patch [38]. patch [18]. (e) Left: daily cam-(d) Adversarial Texture [19]. ouﬂage texture; Right: our adversarial camouﬂage texture. that DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial examples [16, 35].
Adversarial examples can be crafted by adding small per-turbations to the clean inputs, rendering the DNNs’ outputs incorrect. Such vulnerabilities could result in severe safety problems when deploying DNN-based systems. This has become a hot research topic recently [7, 11, 23, 26–28].
Adversarial examples were ﬁrst identiﬁed in the digi-tal world. However, adversarial examples also exist in the physical world, posing more risks in real-world scenarios.
Recently, many works [1,12–14,33,39–41,45–47] have de-signed physical adversarial examples to deceive DNNs in the real world. Among them, hiding persons [18–20, 38, 42,43] from DNN-based object detectors is especially chal-lenging due to the difﬁculties of modeling non-rigid object surfaces (i.e., clothes). Most works [18, 20, 38, 42, 43] print
Figure 2. The training pipeline of the adversarial camouﬂage textures. adversarial patches on the front side of clothes to hide peo-ple from being detected. We call them patch-based adver-sarial examples. These patches are usually conspicuous to humans, making the clothes look strange and easily notice-able by human observers. Efforts have been put on making the adversarial patches more natural-looking [12, 18, 40].
However, these patch-based adversarial clothes can only at-tack object detectors at a narrow range of viewing angles (i.e., when the camera faces the front of the person). To attack the detector at a wider range of viewing angles, one may print the adversarial patches everywhere on the clothes, which would make the clothes unnatural-looking again. For example, a dog-head-like patch on the front of a T-shirt is natural, but putting this patch everywhere on the T-shirt would make the T-shirt look weird.
Another way to craft physical adversarial examples is to design the textures on the surface of the target objects
[1, 13, 19, 39, 44], i.e., crafting texture-base adversarial ex-amples. Unlike patch-based adversarial examples, texture-based ones are usually adversarially effective at multiple viewing angles. They are mostly optimized via 3D mod-eling or using clone networks, and printed on the surface of rigid objects such as turtles [1] and cars [13, 39, 44]. How-ever, it is much harder to realize the 3D textures of non-rigid objects like humans and clothes in the physical world while maintaining their adversarial effectiveness, since there is a huge gap between a 3D human model and a real-world per-son. To circumvent this difﬁculty, Hu et al. [19] propose to craft texture-based adversarial clothes by extending patches into textures with repetitive patterns, which does not require 3D modeling. However, their textures are very conspicuous to humans, and obtaining natural-looking textures can be difﬁcult under the constraint of repetitive patterns.
In this paper, we propose a 3D modeling pipeline to pro-duce natural-looking adversarial clothes that are physically realizable and can hide people at multiple viewing angles.
Speciﬁcally, we craft adversarial camouﬂage texture (Adv-CaT) patterns and apply them on clothes. We choose cam-ouﬂage texture patterns mainly because they are typical tex-ture patterns widely used in daily clothes, therefore making the clothes more natural-looking In order to make the tex-ture patterns more generalizable when applied to deformed and unseen 3D models, we propose a novel 3D augmen-tation method combining topologically plausible projection (TopoProj) and thin plate spline (TPS) [3,10,37,43] for non-rigid objects such as clothes.
We optimized several AdvCaT patterns to attack widely including YOLOv3 [31], Faster used detection models,
RCNN [32], and deformable DETR [48], and applied the texture patterns on clothes in the physical world. See
Fig. 1 for the visualization of our adversarial clothes com-pared with others. Experiments showed that our adversarial clothes could evade different detectors at multiple viewing angles. A subjective test experiment indicated that the nat-uralness score of our adversarial clothes covered with Ad-vCaT is signiﬁcantly higher than other adversarial clothes and close to daily clothes. 2.