Abstract
Owing to the extensive application of infrared object de-tectors in the safety-critical tasks, it is necessary to evaluate their robustness against adversarial examples in the real world. However, current few physical infrared attacks are complicated to implement in practical application because of their complex transformation from digital world to physi-cal world. To address this issue, in this paper, we propose a physically feasible infrared attack method called ”adversar-ial infrared patches”. Considering the imaging mechanism of infrared cameras by capturing objects’ thermal radiation, adversarial infrared patches conduct attacks by attaching a patch of thermal insulation materials on the target object to manipulate its thermal distribution. To enhance adversarial attacks, we present a novel aggregation regularization to guide the simultaneous learning for the patch’ shape and location on the target object. Thus, a simple gradient-based optimization can be adapted to solve for them. We verify adversarial infrared patches in different object detection tasks with various object detectors. Experimental results show that our method achieves more than 90% Attack Suc-cess Rate (ASR) versus the pedestrian detector and vehicle detector in the physical environment, where the objects are captured in different angles, distances, postures, and scenes.
More importantly, adversarial infrared patch is easy to im-plement, and it only needs 0.5 hours to be constructed in the physical world, which verifies its effectiveness and efficiency. 1.

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have shown promising performance in various vision tasks, including object de-tection [14], classification [8], face recognition [16], and autonomous driving [15]. However, it is typically known that DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial examples [2, 5, 26], i.e., the human-imperceptible perturbed inputs can fool the
DNNs-based system to give wrong predictions. Moreover,
*Corresponding author
Figure 1. The generation process of adversarial infrared patches.
We see the pedestrian cannot be detected after the infrared patches are pasted on the pedestrian in the physical world. these adversarial examples can be exploited in the physical world. In such cases, a widely used technique is called ad-versarial patches [1, 4, 24, 28], which have been successfully applied to traffic sign detection by generating a carefully designed sticker [4, 23], or face recognition by adding spe-cific textures on eyeglass frames [17, 22]. The success of adversarial patches raises the concerns because of their great threat to the deployed DNN-based systems in the real world.
Nowadays, famous for its strong anti-interference ability in the severe environment, object detection in the thermal infrared images has been widely used in many safety-critical tasks such as security surveillance [19], remote sensing [25], etc. Consequently, it is necessary to evaluate the physical adversarial robustness of infrared object detectors. However, the aforementioned adversarial patches cannot work well in the infrared images because they depend on the adversarial perturbations generated from the view of RGB appearance.
These perturbations cannot be captured by infrared cameras, which perform the imaging by encoding the objects’ ther-mal radiation [20]. Although few recent works have been proposed to address this issue, they have their own limita-tions. For example, adversarial bulbs based on a cardboard of alight small bulbs [30] are complicated to implement in the real world, and are also not stealthy because they produce heat source. Adversarial clothing [29] based on a large-scale
QR code improves the stealthiness by utilizing the thermal insulation material to cover the object’s thermal radiation, but still has complex transformations from digital to physical world, making it not easy to implement in the real world.
get object. Owing to this careful design, adversarial infrared patches are easier to implement in the physical world than the existing methods.
• We design a novel aggregation regularization to guide the simultaneous learning for the patch’ shape and loca-tion on the target object. Thus, a simple gradient-based optimization can be adapted to solve for the optimal shape and location of the patch.
• We verify the adversarial infrared patches in the pedes-trian detection task from both the digital and physi-cal world. Experiments show that adversarial infrared patches can work well in various angles, distances, pos-tures, and scenes, and achieve competitive attacking performance with the SOTA infrared attack while only costing five percent of their time to construct physical adversarial examples. We also extend our method to the vehicle detection task to verify its generalization. 2.