Abstract
Two-branch network architecture has shown its effi-ciency and effectiveness in real-time semantic segmentation tasks. However, direct fusion of high-resolution details and low-frequency context has the drawback of detailed features being easily overwhelmed by surrounding contextual infor-mation. This overshoot phenomenon limits the improvement of the segmentation accuracy of existing two-branch mod-els. In this paper, we make a connection between Convolu-tional Neural Networks (CNN) and Proportional-Integral-Derivative (PID) controllers and reveal that a two-branch network is equivalent to a Proportional-Integral (PI) con-troller, which inherently suffers from similar overshoot is-sues. To alleviate this problem, we propose a novel three-branch network architecture: PIDNet, which contains three branches to parse detailed, context and boundary informa-tion, respectively, and employs boundary attention to guide the fusion of detailed and context branches. Our family of
PIDNets achieve the best trade-off between inference speed and accuracy and their accuracy surpasses all the existing models with similar inference speed on the Cityscapes and
CamVid datasets. Specifically, PIDNet-S achieves 78.6% mIOU with inference speed of 93.2 FPS on Cityscapes and 80.1% mIOU with speed of 153.7 FPS on CamVid. 1.

Introduction
Proportional-Integral-Derivative (PID) Controller is a classic concept that has been widely applied in modern dy-namic systems and processes such as robotic manipulation
[3], chemical processes [24], and power systems [25]. Even though many advanced control strategies with better con-trol performance have been developed in recent years, PID controller is still the go-to choice for most industry applica-tions due to its simplicity and robustness. Furthermore, the idea of PID controller has been extended to many other ar-1Work supported in part by NSF grants ECCS-1923803 and CCF-2007527.
Figure 1. The trade-off between inference speed and accuracy (re-ported) for real-time models on the Cityscapes [12] test set. Blue stars refer to our models while green triangles represent others. eas. For example, researchers introduced the PID concept to image denoising [32], stochastic gradient decent [1] and nu-merical optimization [50] for better algorithm performance.
In this paper, we devise a novel architecture for real-time se-mantic segmentation tasks by employing the basic concept of PID controller and demonstrate that the performance of our model surpasses all the previous works and achieves the best trade-off between inference speed and accuracy, as il-lustrated in Figure 1, by extensive experiments.
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental task for visual scene parsing with the objective of assigning each pixel in the input image to a specific class label. With the increas-ing demand of intelligence, semantic segmentation has be-come the basic perception component for applications such as autonomous driving [16], medical imaging diagnosis [2] and remote sensing imagery [54]. Starting from FCN [31], which achieved great improvement over traditional meth-ods, deep convnets gradually dominated the semantic seg-mentation field and many representative models have been proposed [4, 6, 40, 48, 59, 60]. For better performance, var-ious strategies were introduced to equip these models with the capability of learning contextual dependencies among
pixels in large scale without missing important details. Even though these models achieve encouraging segmentation ac-curacy, too much computational cost are required, which significantly hinder their application in real-time scenarios, such as autonomous vehicle [16] and robot surgery [44].
To meet real-time or mobile requirements, researchers have come up with many efficient and effective models in the past for semantic segmentation. Specifically, ENet [36] adopted lightweight decoder and downsampled the feature
ICNet [58] encoded small-size in-maps in early stages. puts in complex and deep path to parse the high-level se-mantics. MobileNets [21, 42] replaced traditional convolu-tions with depth-wise separable convolutions. These early works reduced the latency and memory usage of segmen-tation models, but low accuracy significantly limits their real-world application. Recently, many novel and promis-ing models based on Two-Branch Network (TBN) architec-ture have been proposed in the literature and achieve SOTA trade-off between speed and accuracy [15, 20, 38, 39, 52].
In this paper, we view the architecture of TBNs from the prospective of PID controller and point out that a TBN is equivalent to a PI controller, which suffers from the over-shoot issue as illustrated in Figure 2. To alleviate this problem, we devise a novel three-branch network architec-ture, namely PIDNet, and demonstrate its superiority on
Cityscapes [12], CamVid [5] and PASCAL Context [33] datasets. We also provide ablation study and feature visual-ization for better understanding of the functionality of each module in PIDNet. The source code can be accessed via: https://github.com/XuJiacong/PIDNet
The main contributions of this paper are three-fold:
• We make a connection between deep CNN and PID controller and propose a family of three-branch net-works based on the PID controller architecture.
• Efficient modules, such as Bag fusion module de-signed to balance detailed and context features, are proposed to boost the performance of PIDNets.
• PIDNet achieves the best trade-off between inference speed and accuracy among all the existing models.
In particular, PIDNet-S achieves 78.6% mIOU with speed of 93.2 FPS and PIDNet-L presents the high-est accuracy (80.6% mIOU) in real-time doman on
Cityscapes test set without acceleration tools. 2.