Abstract
Current differentiable renderers provide light transport gradients with respect to arbitrary scene parameters. How-ever, the mere existence of these gradients does not guaran-tee useful update steps in an optimization. Instead, inverse rendering might not converge due to inherent plateaus, i.e., regions of zero gradient, in the objective function. We pro-pose to alleviate this by convolving the high-dimensional that maps scene parameters to im-rendering function, ages, with an additional kernel that blurs the parameter space. We describe two Monte Carlo estimators to compute plateau-reduced gradients efficiently, i.e., with low vari-ance, and show that these translate into net-gains in op-timization error and runtime performance. Our approach is a straightforward extension to both black-box and dif-ferentiable renderers and enables optimization of problems with intricate light transport, such as caustics or global illumination, that existing differentiable renderers do not converge on. Our code is at github.com/mfischer-ucl/prdpt. 1.

Introduction
Regressing scene parameters like object position, mate-rials or lighting from 2D observations is a task of significant importance in graphics and vision, but also a hard, ill-posed problem. When all rendering steps are differentiable, we can derive gradients of the final image w.r.t. the scene pa-rameters. However, differentiating through the discontinu-ous rendering operator is not straightforward due to, e.g., occlusion. The two main approaches to (differentiable) ren-dering are path tracing and rasterization.
Physically-based path-tracing solves the rendering equa-tion by computing a Monte Carlo (MC) estimate for each pixel. Unfortunately, MC is only compatible with modern
Automatic Differentiation (AD) frameworks for the case of continuous integrands, e.g., color, but not for spatial deriva-tives, i.e., gradients w.r.t. an object’s position. To alleviate this, Li et al. [18] present re-sampling of silhouette edges and Loubet et al. [23] propose re-parametrizing the inte-grand, enabling the optimization of primitive- or light posi-Figure 1. Optimization results with a differentiable path tracer (we use Mitsuba 3 [28]) and our proposed method. The task is to rotate the coffee cup around its z-axis, so that the handle moves to the right side. Due to a plateau in the objective function (when the handle is occluded by the cup), regular methods do not converge. tions. For rasterization, differentiability is achieved by re-placing discontinuous edge- and z-tests with hand-crafted derivatives [17, 21, 22, 34]. The problem here is that raster-ization, by design, does not capture complex light transport effects, e.g., global illumination, scattering or caustics.
Importantly, the mere existence of gradients is no guar-antee that descending along them will make an optimization converge [25]. There are surprisingly many cases where they do not lead to a successful optimization, due to a plateau in the objective function. An example is finding the orientation of the mug in Fig. 1: As soon as the handle disappears behind the cup, no infinitesimally small rotation change will result in a reduced loss. We have hence reached a plateau in the objective function, i.e., a region of zero gra-dients. We propose a method to remove these plateaus while still having complete, complex light transport.
We take inspiration from differentiable rasterization lit-erature [17, 21, 32, 34], where smoothing techniques are used to model the influence of faraway triangles to the pixel at hand. For rasterization, this simple change has two ef-fects: First, it makes the edge- and z-tests continuous and hence differentiable, and second, in passing (and, to our knowledge, much less studied), it also removes plateaus.
In this work, we hence aim to find a way to apply the same concept to complex light transport. Therefore, instead of making the somewhat arbitrary choice of a fixed smoothing function for edge- and depth-tests in differentiable raster-izers, we path-trace an alternative, smooth version of the entire Rendering Equation (RE), which we achieve by con-volving the original RE with a smoothing kernel. This leads to our proposed method, a lightweight extension to (differ-entiable) path tracers that extends the infinitely-dimensional path integral to the product space of paths and scene param-eters. The resulting double integral can still be MC-solved efficiently, in particular with variance reduction techniques we derive (importance sampling and antithetic sampling). 2.