Abstract 1.

Introduction
In this paper, we present a new representation for neural radiance fields that accelerates both the training and the inference processes with VDB, a hierarchical data struc-ture for sparse volumes. VDB takes both the advantages of sparse and dense volumes for compact data representa-tion and efficient data access, being a promising data struc-ture for NeRF data interpolation and ray marching. Our method, Plenoptic VDB (PlenVDB), directly learns the VDB data structure from a set of posed images by means of a novel training strategy and then uses it for real-time ren-dering. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness and the efficiency of our method over previous arts: First, it converges faster in the training process. Second, it delivers a more compact data format for NeRF data presentation.
Finally, it renders more efficiently on commodity graphics hardware. Our mobile PlenVDB demo achieves 30+ FPS, 1280×720 resolution on an iPhone12 mobile phone. Check plenvdb.github.io for details.
* Work done while the author was an intern at ByteDance.
† Corresponding authors.
With the recent advancement of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [17], high-quality Novel View Synthesis from a sparse set of input images can be achieved. It has many ap-plications in multimedia, AR/VR, gaming, etc. On the other hand, new content creation paradigms have been proposed based on NeRF, such as Dreamfusion [25], which enable the possibility of general text-to-3D synthesis.
Despite the promising results, one shortage of NeRF is the expensive computation of training and rendering, which prohibits real-time applications and effective scene creation.
There have been many efforts to accelerate NeRF rendering by pre-computing and storing the results or intermediate re-sults into a 3D grid. Thus, the computation cost for ren-dering will be reduced by several orders of magnitude. Al-though the methods that exploit 3D dense grid [7,27,30] can achieve real-time rendering and fast training, they usually introduce more storage overhead, which limits the applica-tion on mobile devices. On the other hand, for the methods that utilize 3D sparsity [4, 5, 9, 10, 33], real-time rendering and small storage overhead can be achieved, but the training time is usually getting worse since many of them will first
train a Vanilla NeRF or a dense grid, and then convert it to the sparse representation.
In this paper, we propose an efficient sparse neural vol-ume representation, which we call Plenoptic VDB (Plen-VDB). The VDB [19] is an industry-proven efficient hierar-chical data structure being used in high-performance anima-tion and simulation for years. We adopt its design principle and use VDB to represent NeRF. VDB takes both advan-tages of sparse and dense volumes for compact data repre-sentation and efficient data access, being a promising data structure for NeRF data interpolation and ray casting.
In addition, we propose a novel training approach to directly learn the VDB data without additional conversion steps, so that our model is neat and compact. We show that our model represents high-resolution details of a scene with a lower volume size for fast training and rendering over the state of the arts. Moreover, the trained VDB model can be ex-ported into the NanoVDB [20] format and be used in graph-ics shaders, such as the GLSL fragment shader, that enables rendering a NeRF model on mobile devices in real-time.
In our experiment, the mobile PlenVDB achieves 30+ FPS, 1280×720 resolution on an iPhone12 mobile phone.
In summary, our approach has two main contributions:
• We first use VDB as the sparse volume data structure for NeRF acceleration, and achieve fast rendering even on mobile devices.
• We propose a strategy that learns the VDB directly and achieves fast training and occupies small storage. 2.