Abstract
Indirect time-of-flight (iToF) imaging allows us to capture dense depth information at a low cost. However, iToF imag-ing often suffers from multipath interference (MPI) arti-facts in the presence of scattering media, resulting in se-vere depth-accuracy degradation. For instance, iToF cam-eras cannot measure depth accurately through fog because
ToF active illumination scatters back to the sensor before reaching the farther target surface. In this work, we pro-pose a polarimetric iToF imaging method that can capture depth information robustly through scattering media. Our observations on the principle of indirect ToF imaging and polarization of light allow us to formulate a novel computa-tional model of scattering-aware polarimetric phase mea-surements that enables us to correct MPI errors. We first devise a scattering-aware polarimetric iToF model that can estimate the phase of unpolarized backscattered light. We then combine the optical filtering of polarization and our computational modeling of unpolarized backscattered light via scattering analysis of phase and amplitude. This allows us to tackle the MPI problem by estimating the scattering energy through the participating media. We validate our method on an experimental setup using a customized off-the-shelf iToF camera. Our method outperforms baseline methods by a significant margin by means of our scattering model and polarimetric phase measurements. 1.

Introduction
Time-of-Flight (ToF) imaging is the cornerstone of mod-ern 3D imaging technology that has received great attention across diverse fields, including computer graphics and vi-sion. Its notable applications include autonomous driving, 3D motion capture, digital-human reconstruction, human-computer interfaces, robotics, etc. Modern ToF cameras can be broadly categorized into direct and indirect sys-tems. Direct ToF measures the round-trip time of pho-tons emitted from an illumination source until they travel back to the ToF detector.
Indirect ToF, referred to as amplitude-modulated continuous-wave ToF, utilizes a tem-Figure 1. We introduce a polarimetric iToF imaging method that can estimate depth robustly through scattering media. (a) A pho-(b) Ground-truth depth tograph of the input scene without fog. measure without fog. (c) Input iToF amplitude map captured with fog. (d) Depth estimated by a conventional iToF camera with fog. (e) Depth improved by na¨ıve cross-polarization filtering. (f) Our iToF depth measurement result is fairly close to the GT depth. porally modulated illumination source and computationally estimates the round-trip time of photons from modulation phase changes [21]. The indirect acquisition principle low-ers the system-building cost by departing from the neces-sity of the picosecond-accurate illumination, detector, and synchronization module used in direct ToF. Furthermore, indirect ToF achieves low-cost instant 3D imaging of the entire field of view with flood-fill illumination. As a re-sult, indirect ToF cameras have achieved remarkable suc-cess in commercial markets, e.g., Microsoft Azure Kinect and PMD sensors.
However, it is also the indirect-imaging scheme that poses critical limitations on robust 3D imaging. One of the notable resulting challenges is multi-path interference (MPI). Light emitted from the ToF illumination module travels through a scene and reaches the ToF sensor. During light transport, some photons interact with only one scene point via direct reflection, thus providing accurate depth in-formation of that point. However, other photons undergo multiple reflections on different scene points because of in-direct reflection.
If a pixel on the ToF sensor receives a mixture of direct and indirect photons, the measured phase shift does not correspond to the analytical phase shift of the target scene depth anymore. Thus, it degrades the accuracy of the reconstructed depth.
The MPI problem becomes more severe in the presence of scattering media such as fog (Figure 1(a) for example) because light photons experience numerous indirect reflec-tions with the scattering particles. In this case, the scattered light energy often exceeds that of light interacting with a target scene point, resulting in extremely inaccurate scene depth estimation as shown in Figure 1(c), i.e., the measured distance through fog tends to be closer than the actual dis-tance. This acts as a critical hurdle for indirect ToF cameras to be deployed in the wild, e.g., fire-rescuing robots, au-tonomous driving under fog, and underwater navigation.
In this paper, we propose a polarimetric iToF imaging method robust to scattering environments. Our key idea is to revisit the polarization of light and the scattering theory about intensity attenuation and depolarization. Our method allows for accurate scene depth estimation even in the pres-ence of severe scattering media, as shown in Figure 1(d).
We leverage the polarization property of light that the backscattered light from scattering particles better main-tains the polarization state of the emitted photons than the light that travels farther to a surface [6]. We first configure the orthogonal polarization modulation of ToF illumination and detection to initially filter out the polarized backscat-tered light optically. While existing methods [7, 13, 36, 39] also demonstrate the effectiveness of this cross-polarization setup, one critical problem of cross-polarization setup is that the assumption on the polarized state of backscattered light does not hold in practice because backscattered light undergoes a change of polarization throughout scattering events toward an unpolarized state [37]. This results in lim-ited depth accuracy.
To handle this, we devise a computational method that can eliminate the remaining unpolarized backscattered light based on the indirect ToF’s signal representation: phase and amplitude. First, we estimate the phase of unpolar-ized backscattered light by revisiting the scattering model of intensity attenuation and depolarization [33]. Second, the amplitude of unpolarized backscattered light is estimated based on the observation that the amplitude-offset ratio is consistent for non-scattered light. Then, our method sub-tracts the unpolarized backscattered light from the initial cross-polarization measurements, resulting in the estimates of scattering-free indirect ToF measurements. Our polari-metric iToF imaging method can enhance depth accuracy significantly, outperforming existing baselines for depth es-timation through scattering media, as shown in Figure 1(d).
In summary, our contributions are:
• A scattering-aware polarimetric phasor model specifi-cally designed for polarimetric iToF imaging, based on the scattering theory of light intensity attenuation and depolarization.
• An efficient scattering phasor optimization that can es-timate the phase of unpolarized backscattered light via scattering analysis of phase and amplitude in iToF. 2.