Abstract
Pose synchronization, which seeks to estimate consistent absolute poses among a collection of objects from noisy relative poses estimated between pairs of objects in isolation, is a fundamental problem in many inverse applications. This paper studies an extreme setting where multiple relative pose estimates exist between each object pair, and the majority is incorrect.
Popular methods that solve pose synchronization via recovering a low-rank matrix that encodes relative poses in block fail under this extreme setting. We introduce a three-step algorithm for pose synchronization under multiple relative pose inputs.
The first step performs diffusion and clustering to compute the candidate poses of the input objects. We present a theoretical result to justify our diffusion formulation.
The second step jointly optimizes the best pose for each object. The final step refines the output of the second step.
Experimental results on benchmark datasets of structure-from-motion and scan-based geometry reconstruction show that our approach offers more accurate absolute poses than state-of-the-art pose synchronization techniques. 1.

Introduction
Pose synchronization, which seeks to estimate absolute object poses from noisy relative poses estimated between object pairs, is a fundamental problem in many inverse applications in vision and graphics. Examples include multi-view structure from motion [38], 3D reconstruction from RGB-D scans [21], and reassembling fractured objects [14]. This problem has received great process starting early greedy during the past approaches optimization-based approaches [2, 4, 11, 15, 17, 19, 20, 26–31, 34, 37]. However, existing approaches assume that there is only one relative pose for each object pair, and most relative poses are inliers.
This assumption breaks when relative pose estimation is challenging, e.g., in 3D reconstruction from sparse views.
The correct poses may differ from the top-ranked relative poses obtained by a pairwise matching method. two decades, to
[14, 21] recent
In this paper, we study a new pose synchronization
Figure 1. Our approach takes multiple candidate relative poses between pairs of objects as input and outputs absolute poses of the input objects for geometry reconstruction. setting, where there are multiple relative pose estimates between an object pair, and most of them may be incorrect.
This setting is quite popular, e.g., when overlapping ratios are low, or objects possess partial symmetries. Our approach proceeds in three simple steps. The first step computes for each object a set of candidate poses. This step is based on the fact that a correct relative pose between any object and a root object shall be realized by composing relative poses along multiple paths that connect them. We introduce an iterative procedure that alternates between diffusion and clustering to compute candidate poses. The second step solves a Markov Random Field (MRF) inference problem to jointly selects the best pose for each object so that the induced relative pose agrees with the input relative poses. The third step performs robust optimization to fine-tune the absolute poses of input objects.
Our approach’s novelty is a diffusion formulation that synchronizes potentially multiple relative poses between object pairs into candidate poses for each object. The formulation, which utilizes a mixture model, is accurate, robust to noise, and theoretically justified. The resulting candidate poses enable a simple MRF approach via the projected power method [36]. Compared to prior MRF formulations [8,33] that are based on uniform sampling, our approach does not suffer from discretization errors.
We have evaluated our approach on benchmark datasets of multi-view structure-from-motion and geometry reconstruction from depth scans. Experimental results
show that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art pose synchronization approaches. 2.