Abstract
Content-aware visual-textual presentation layout aims at arranging spatial space on the given canvas for pre-defined elements, including text, logo, and underlay, which is a key to automatic template-free creative graphic design. In prac-tical applications, e.g., poster designs, the canvas is orig-inally non-empty, and both inter-element relationships as well as inter-layer relationships should be concerned when generating a proper layout. A few recent works deal with them simultaneously, but they still suffer from poor graphic performance, such as a lack of layout variety or spatial non-alignment. Since content-aware visual-textual presen-tation layout is a novel task, we first construct a new dataset named PKU PosterLayout, which consists of 9,974 poster-layout pairs and 905 images, i.e., non-empty canvases. It is more challenging and useful for greater layout variety, domain diversity, and content diversity. Then, we propose design sequence formation (DSF) that reorganizes elements in layouts to imitate the design processes of human design-ers, and a novel CNN-LSTM-based conditional generative adversarial network (GAN) is presented to generate proper layouts. Specifically, the discriminator is design-sequence-aware and will supervise the ”design” process of the gen-erator. Experimental results verify the usefulness of the new benchmark and the effectiveness of the proposed ap-proach, which achieves the best performance by generating suitable layouts for diverse canvases. The dataset and the source code are available at https://github.com/PKU-ICST-MIPL/PosterLayout-CVPR2023. 1.

Introduction
Nowadays, visual-textual presentation rendering infor-mative and decorative elements on an image, i.e., canvas, is widely used to convey information, such as advertisement posters [5, 13, 16], magazines [20, 22], and so on [4, 10, 15].
*Corresponding author. (a) (b) (c)
Figure 1. Content-aware visual-textual presentation layout: (a)
Non-empty canvas; (b) Content-aware layout; (c) An example of rendered presentation applying (b).
The basis of these creative works is the layout that indicates the spatial structure of the arranged elements, as shown in
Fig. 1, which is also a key factor influencing their effective-ness and aesthetics. For their popularity and usefulness, not only experienced designers but also novice ones or ”new-bies” are commonly in need of creating them. People re-sort to pre-defined templates when they don’t have enough prerequisites or need mass production. However, one can easily imagine that these templates harshly limit the flexi-bility and diversity of the presentations. These drawbacks of relying on templates hence highlight the importance and practicality of template-free creative graphic design, which can be preliminarily satisfied by automatically generating visual-textual presentation layouts.
With the advance in deep learning and big data, more and more data-driven approaches for visual-textual presentation layout have emerged in this decade. However, most of them have only been devoted to mining the relationship between elements and seldom concerned between layers, i.e., layout and canvas. Without proper constraints, elements are easily prone to cover the salient contents in the canvas, causing a severe occlusion problem. For example, in advertisement poster design, one of the most content-rich presentations, the product in the canvas shouldn’t be over-occluded, which is no doubt. A few works [1,23] deal with inter-element and
inter-layer relationships simultaneously, but they still suf-fer from poor graphic performance, such as a lack of lay-out variety or spatial non-alignment. To this end, we pro-pose a CNN-LSTM-based generative adversarial network (GAN) conditioned by the input canvases to generate lay-outs, which has a balanced performance on both graphic and content-aware metrics.
CNN-LSTM is proved effective in time series forecast-ing or behavior analysis tasks [6, 14]. To enable this time-sensitive model in layout generation, we propose design se-quence formation (DSF) to generate design sequences that imitate the design processes of human designers.
In par-ticular, elements in layouts are reorganized to involve im-plicit temporal features, and less important ones can be dis-carded painlessly.
It is in line with the logic of human-computer interaction logic [5] and has the potential to help train the LSTM model on a training set of size smaller than 20,000 [18]. GAN is a generative model that contains a discriminator and a generator gaming against each other to learn the distribution of training data. In the proposed de-sign sequence GAN (DS-GAN), the discriminator is design-sequence-aware and will supervise the ”design” process, i.e., generated layouts, of the generator under the constraints of the given canvas. As far as we know, this paper is the first adoption of CNN-LSTM in layout generation.
Since content-aware visual-textual presentation layout remains a novel task, there is only one public dataset in the field, and it has insufficient variety. In this paper, we first construct and release a new dataset and benchmark named
PKU PosterLayout, which consists of 9,974 poster-layout pairs and 905 images, i.e., non-empty canvases. Each lay-out is represented by a set of elements labeled with class and bounding box. We collect data from multiple sources to guarantee diversity and variety in content, domain, and lay-out, supporting it as a challenging benchmark expected to encourage further research. Besides the dataset, we propose and clearly define new metrics to accompany the old ones, a total of eight graphic and content-aware metrics. They evaluate the layouts in terms of utilization, non-occlusion, and aesthetics. Both quantitative results and visualized re-sults show that the proposed approach outperforms other ap-proaches by generating proper layouts on diverse canvases.
We summarize the contribution of this paper as follows:
• A new and more challenging dataset and benchmark for content-aware visual-textual presentation layout,
PKU PosterLayout, consists of 9,974 poster-layout pairs and 905 images, with greater diversity and va-riety in content, domain, and layout.
• An algorithm for design sequence formation (DSF) converts plain layout data into design sequences in-volving temporal features by imitating the design pro-cess of human designers.
• A CNN-LSTM-based GAN, design sequence GAN (DS-GAN), is conditioned by images and learns the distribution of design sequences to generate content-aware visual-textual presentation layouts.
It makes a good trade-off between graphic and content-aware metrics, which outperforms the other approaches. 2.