Abstract
Transformer architectures have achieved SOTA perfor-mance on the human mesh recovery (HMR) from monocu-lar images. However, the performance gain has come at the cost of substantial memory and computational overhead. A lightweight and efficient model to reconstruct accurate hu-In this man mesh is needed for real-world applications. paper, we propose a pure transformer architecture named
POoling aTtention TransformER (POTTER) for the HMR task from single images. Observing that the conventional attention module is memory and computationally expensive, we propose an efficient pooling attention module, which sig-nificantly reduces the memory and computational cost with-out sacrificing performance. Furthermore, we design a new transformer architecture by integrating a High-Resolution (HR) stream for the HMR task. The high-resolution local and global features from the HR stream can be utilized for recovering more accurate human mesh. Our POTTER out-performs the SOTA method METRO by only requiring 7% of total parameters and 14% of the Multiply-Accumulate
Operations on the Human3.6M (PA-MPJPE metric) and 3DPW (all three metrics) datasets. The project webpage is https://zczcwh.github.io/potter_page/. 1.

Introduction
With the blooming of deep learning techniques in the computer vision community, rapid progress has been made in understanding humans from monocular images such as human pose estimation (HPE). No longer satisfied with de-tecting 2D or 3D human joints from monocular images, hu-man mesh recovery (HMR) which can estimate 3D human pose and shape of the entire human body has drawn increas-ing attention. Various real-world applications such as gam-*Work conducted during an internship at OPPO Seattle Research Cen-ter, USA.
Figure 1. HMR performance comparison with Params and MACs on 3DPW dataset. We outperform SOTA methods METRO [17] and FastMETRO [3] with much fewer Params and MACs. PA-MPJPE is the Procrustes Alignment Mean Per Joint Position Error. ing, human-computer interaction, and virtual reality (VR) can be facilitated by HMR with rich human body informa-tion. However, HMR from single images is extremely chal-lenging due to complex human body articulation, occlusion, and depth ambiguity.
Recently, motivated by the evolution of the transformer architecture in natural language processing, Vision Trans-former (ViT) [4] successfully introduced transformer archi-tecture to the field of computer vision. The attention mecha-nism in transformer architecture demonstrates a strong abil-ity to model global dependencies in comparison to the Con-volutional Neural Network (CNN) architecture. With this trend, the transformer-based models have sparked a vari-ety of computer vision tasks, including object detection
[23, 26], semantic segmentation [2, 38], and video under-standing [22, 31] with promising results. For HMR, the
SOTA methods [3, 17] all utilize the transformer architec-ture to exploit non-local relations among different human body parts for achieving impressive performance.
However, one significant limitation of these SOTA HMR methods is model efficiency. Although transformer-based methods [17, 18] lead to great improvement in terms of ac-curacy, the performance gain comes at the cost of a substan-tial computational and memory overhead. The large CNN backbones are needed for [17, 18] to extract features first.
Then, computational and memory expensive transformer architectures are applied to process the extracted features for the mesh reconstruction. Mainly pursuing higher accu-racy is not an optimal solution for deploying HMR models in real-world applications such as human-computer interac-tion, animated avatars, and VR gaming (for instance, SOTA method METRO [17] requires 229M Params and 56.6G
MACs as shown in Fig. 1). Therefore, it is important to also consider the memory footprint and computational complex-ity when evaluating an HMR model.
Figure 2. Transformer blocks of different models. We suppose the number of patches (N) and the embedding dimension (D) for each block are the same when comparing the Params and MACs. p , W p × W
To bridge this gap, we aim to design a lightweight end-to-end transformer-based network for efficient HMR. Ob-serving that the transformer blocks (attention-based ap-proaches in Fig. 2 (a) and MLP-based approaches in Fig. 2 (b)) are usually computational and memory consuming, we propose a Pooling Attention Transformer (PAT) block as shown in Fig. 2 (c) to achieve model efficiency. After patch embedding, the image input becomes X = [D, H p ], where D is the embedding dimension and the number of patches is N = H p when patch size is p × p. The in-put for transformer block is often written as Xin = [N, D].
To reduce the memory and computational costs, we design a Pooling Attention (PoolAttn) module in our PAT block.
The PoolAttn consists of patch-wise pooling attention and embed-wise pooling attention. For the patch-wise pooling attention block, we preserve the patches’ spatial structure based on the input Xin = [D, H p ], then apply patch-wise pooling attention to capture the correlation of all the patches. For the embed-wise pooling attention block, we maintain the 2D spatial structure of each patch (without flat-tening to 1D embedded features). The input is reshaped to
Xin = [N, Dh, Dw], where Dh × Dw = D is the embed-ding dimension. The embed-wise pooling attention is ap-plied to model the dependencies of the embedding dimen-sions in each patch. A detailed explanation is provided in
Section 3.2. The Params and MACs comparison between the PoolAttn and conventional attention module or MLP-based module is shown in Fig. 2 (d). Thus, PAT can reduce the Params and MACs significantly while maintaining high p , W
Figure 3. The illustration in terms of patches during each stage in transformer architectures. performance, which can be utilized for efficient HMR.
Equipped with PAT as our transformer block, the next step for building an efficient and powerful transformer-based HMR model is to design an overall architecture. The naive approach is to apply a Vision Transformer [4] (ViT) architecture as shown in Fig. 3 (a). The image is first split into patches. After patch embedding, a sequence of patches is treated as tokens for transformer blocks. But in
ViT, patches are always within a fixed scale in transformer blocks, producing low-resolution features. For the HMR task, high-resolution features are needed because human body parts can vary substantially in scale. Moreover, ViT architecture focuses on capturing the global correlation, but the local relations can not be well modeled. Recently, Swin
[21] introduced a hierarchical transformer-based architec-ture as shown in Fig. 3 (b). It has the flexibility to model the patches at various scales, the global correlation can be enhanced during hierarchical blocks. However, it also pro-duces low-resolution features after the final stage. To obtain high-resolution features, additional CNN networks such as
Feature Pyramid Network [19] (FPN) are required to aggre-gate hierarchical feature maps for HMR. Thus, we propose our end-to-end architecture as shown in Fig. 3 (c), the hier-archical patch representation ensures the self-attention can be modeled globally through transformer blocks with patch merge. To overcome the issue that high-resolution represen-tation becomes low-resolution after patch merge, we pro-pose a High-Resolution (HR) stream that can maintain high-resolution representation through patch split by leveraging the local and global features from the basic stream. Finally, the high-resolution local and global features are used for re-constructing accurate human mesh. The entire framework is also lightweight and efficient by applying our PAT block as the transformer block.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose a Pooling Transformer Block (PAT) which is composed of the Pooling Attention (PoolAttn) module to reduce the memory and computational burden without sacrificing performance.
• We design a new transformer architecture for HMR by integrating a High-Resolution (HR) stream. Considering the patch’s merging and split properties in transformer, the HR stream returns high-resolution local and global features for reconstructing accurate human mesh.
• Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our method – POTTER. In the HMR task,
POTTER surpasses the transformer-based SOTA method
METRO [17] on Human3.6M (PA-MPJPE metric) and 3DPW (all three metrics) datasets with only 7 % of
Params and 14 % MACs. 2.