Abstract
Despite the remarkable progress in generative technol-ogy, the Janus-faced issues of intellectual property protec-tion and malicious content supervision have arisen. Efforts have been paid to manage synthetic images by attributing them to a set of potential source models. However, the closed-set classification setting limits the application in real-world scenarios for handling contents generated by arbitrary models. In this study, we focus on a challenging task, namely Open-Set Model Attribution (OSMA), to simul-taneously attribute images to known models and identify those from unknown ones. Compared to existing open-set recognition (OSR) tasks focusing on semantic novelty,
OSMA is more challenging as the distinction between images from known and unknown models may only lie in visually imperceptible traces. To this end, we propose a
Progressive Open Space Expansion (POSE) solution, which simulates open-set samples that maintain the same se-mantics as closed-set samples but embedded with different imperceptible traces. Guided by a diversity constraint, the open space is simulated progressively by a set of lightweight augmentation models. We consider three real-world sce-narios and construct an OSMA benchmark dataset, includ-ing unknown models trained with different random seeds, architectures, and datasets from known ones. Extensive experiments on the dataset demonstrate POSE is superior to both existing model attribution methods and off-the-shelf
OSR methods. Github: https://github.com/ICTMCG/POSE 1.

Introduction
Advanced generative modeling technology can create extremely realistic visual content, leading to dramatic changes in the field of AI-enhanced design, arts, and meta-universe [23, 41, 47]. Whereas, the broadcasting of mali-cious content generated by open source generation models
*Corresponding author
Figure 1. Open-set model attribution problem: The unknown classes include unknown models different from known models in training seeds, architectures, or training datasets. The goal is to simultaneously attribute images to known models and identify those from unknown ones. has brought severe social impacts [9, 18, 43]. Furthermore, new challenges have arisen for the ownership protection of copyrighted digital generative models. To solve these problems, model attribution, i.e., identifying the source model of generated contents, has drawn increasing attention recently [5, 33, 48, 50, 53].
Marra et al. [33] are among the first to point out that
GAN models leave specific fingerprints in the generated images, just like camera devices. Further researches [5, 14, 48, 50, 53] validate the existence of GAN fingerprints and show the feasibility of attributing fake images to a fixed and finite set of known models. However, most of these works focus on finding discriminative fingerprints among the contents generated by different GAN models following a simple closed-set setup. The ever-growing number of unseen source models in the real-world scenario appeal
In this paper, we focus on for a more generic approach.
the problem of Open-Set Model Attribution (OSMA), i.e., simultaneously attributing images to known source models and identifying those from unknown ones.
An intuitive way to solve OSMA is to apply off-the-shelf open-set recognition (OSR) approaches to closed-set model attribution classifiers. Traditional OSR methods leverage the output logits to either reject or categorize the input images [2, 44]. However, following the discriminative line, the performance highly depends on the closed-set classi-fier [46]. The learned feature space is not rectified for open-set samples. Another mainstream of OSR methods is based on simulating open-set samples or features [7,27,35,36,58].
By the simulation of open space, the learned feature space is more compact for closed-set categories [58], leading the detection of unknown samples more valid. Nevertheless, existing works only leverage a single generator [7, 27, 35] or mechanism [58] for simulating open-set samples or features, which are not diverse enough to reduce the open space risk for OSMA. A generator could produce open-set samples of different semantics, but its fingerprint is fixed and thus not suitable for the expansion of open space.
In this study, we propose Progressive Open Space Ex-pansion (POSE) tailored for open-set model attribution, which simulates the potential open space of challenging unknown models through involving a set of augmentation models progressively. For augmentation model construc-tion, it can be daunting to consider all types of unknown models with a variety of architectures. Instead, lightweight networks composed of a few convolution layers are em-ployed. They serve as “virtual” follow-up blocks of known models, augmenting closed-set samples to open-set samples surrounding them by modifying their fingerprints with re-construction residuals. Despite the simple structure, these augmentation models show the potential to model traces of a variety of unknown models. To enrich the simulated open space, multiple augmentation models are involved. Instead of training them independently, we design a progressive training mechanism to ensure the diversity of simulated open space across models in a computation-effective way.
To validate the effectiveness of POSE in the open world, we construct a benchmark dataset considering three chal-lenging unknown scenarios as shown in Figure 1, which includes unknown models trained with either a different random seed, architecture or dataset from known mod-els. Extensive experiments on the benchmark demonstrate
POSE is superior to both existing GAN attribution methods and OSR methods. In summary, our contributions are:
• We tackle an important challenge for applying model attribution to open scenarios, the open-set model attribution problem, which attributes images to known models and identifies images from unknown ones.
• We propose a novel solution named POSE, which sim-ulates the potential open space of unknown models pro-gressively by a set of lightweight augmentation models, and consequently reduces open space risk.
• We construct an OSMA benchmark simulating the real-world scenarios, on which extensive experiments prove the superiority of POSE compared with existing GAN attribution methods and off-the-shelf OSR methods. 2.