Abstract
Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) tracking has drawn increasing attention in recent years, due to its ability to detect ob-ject motion out of sight. Most previous works on NLOS tracking rely on active illumination, e.g., laser, and suf-fer from high cost and elaborate experimental conditions.
Besides, these techniques are still far from practical appli-cation due to oversimpliﬁed settings. In contrast, we pro-pose a purely passive method to track a person walking in an invisible room by only observing a relay wall, which is more in line with real application scenarios, e.g., security.
To excavate imperceptible changes in videos of the relay wall, we introduce difference frames as an essential car-In addition, we rier of temporal-local motion messages. propose PAC-Net, which consists of alternating propaga-tion and calibration, making it capable of leveraging both dynamic and static messages on a frame-level granular-ity. To evaluate the proposed method, we build and publish the ﬁrst dynamic passive NLOS tracking dataset, NLOS-Track, which ﬁlls the vacuum of realistic NLOS datasets.
NLOS-Track contains thousands of NLOS video clips and corresponding trajectories. Both real-shot and synthetic data are included. Our codes and dataset are available at https://againstentropy.github.io/NLOS-Track/. 1.

Introduction
In contrast to conventional imaging within the di-rect line-of-sight (LOS), non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imag-ing aims to tackle an inverse problem, i.e., using indirect signal (e.g., reﬂection from a visible relay wall) to recover information of invisible areas. To specify, NLOS tracking manages to reconstruct a continuous trajectory in real time when an object or a person is moving in an invisible region, which is sketched in Fig. 1. The ability to track moving objects outside the LOS would enable promising applica-tions, such as autonomous driving, robotic vision, security, medical imaging, post-disaster searching, and rescue opera-tions, etc. [2, 14, 17, 27], thus receiving increasing attention in recent years.
*Equal contribution.
†Corresponding author.
Figure 1. A schematic of the passive NLOS tracking. The char-acter is walking in the hidden scene and we can perform real-time tracking by observing and analyzing the relay wall from outside the room with a RGB camera, without any additional equipment.
Existing NLOS tracking techniques mostly rely on active illumination from the detection side [4, 5, 7, 8, 16, 23, 25, 28, 35, 36]. Although introducing denser and ﬁner information, active illumination typically requires expen-sive equipment (e.g., ultra-fast pulsed laser) and elaborate experimental conditions [29]. These defects cause a gap be-tween active techniques and practical applications. Besides, the oversimpliﬁed setting in previous works even expands the gap. Unlike active methods, passive NLOS techniques
[1, 3, 5, 18, 19, 29–31, 33, 39, 41] only depend on the feeble diffuse reﬂection of the hidden region, getting rid of require-ments of expensive equipment. So this paper focuses on the low-cost passive NLOS tracking task in realistic scenarios.
We ﬁnd that most existing NLOS tracking works merely locate the object in each frame independently [4, 5, 7, 8, 19, 23,28,36], without considering the position relationship be-tween adjoining moments. This practice directly causes jit-ters of trajectory, thus resulting in inaccurate tracking (see
Sec. 5.3 for more details). In this paper, we consider the sig-niﬁcance of making use of motion information and taking advantage of motion continuity prior, which helps achieve more coherent and accurate tracking results.
Furthermore, face the dilemma that the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is extremely low [6, 8]. To address this problem, some previous works passive NLOS techniques
conduct background estimation with the video’s temporal mean and apply background subtraction to every frame
[3, 19, 33].
In this way, the difference between frames could be ampliﬁed, thus increasing the SNR. However, temporal-mean subtraction inevitably mixes up information from early period. Consequently, it reintroduces extra noise into originally low-SNR signals, which is still a hazard to excavating faint differences between frames.
To address the aforementioned problems, we ﬁrst in-troduce difference frame to describe motion information.
Compared to background estimation and subtraction, a dif-ference frame can be readily obtained by subtracting the previous frame from the current frame. In this way, a dif-ference frame can represent the immediate motion infor-mation, and will not introduce noise from other periods.
Our experiments show that difference frames do convey es-sential dynamic messages (see Sec. 5.3 for more details).
Additionally, we propose a novel network named PAC-Net (Propagation And Calibration Network), which integrates motion continuity prior into the algorithm. Consisting of two dual modules, Propagation-Cell and Calibration-Cell,
PAC-Net maintains a good continuity of trajectory via prop-agating with difference frames and then alternately calibrat-ing with raw frames. Our experimental results demonstrate that PAC-Net can achieve centimeter-level precision when tracking a walking person in real time.
We also build NLOS-Track, the ﬁrst public-accessible video dataset for passive NLOS tracking. It contains real-istic scenes to support the proposed task and method, and we expect NLOS-Track to facilitate more NLOS works. In contrast to oversimpliﬁed settings in existing NLOS track-ing works, NLOS-Track dataset manages to simulate realis-tic scenarios with humans walking in unknown scenes. The dataset consists of 500 real-shot videos and more than 1,000 synthetic videos, each recording the relay wall when a char-acter walks along the randomly generated trajectory. Paired trajectory ground truth of each video clip is also provided.
Our contributions are mainly in three folds:
• We propose and formulate the purely passive NLOS tracking task, which avoids the use of expensive equip-ment. Development on this task will allow promis-ing and valuable applications in many ﬁelds, such as robotic vision, medical imaging, etc.
• We propose a passive NLOS tracking network, PAC-Net, which is capable of utilizing both dynamic and static messages on a frame level. As for dynamic messages, we specially introduce difference frames as clear carriers of motion information, which gets rid of introducing extra noise from other periods.
• We establish the ﬁrst passive NLOS trajectory track-ing dataset, NLOS-Track, which contains thousands of video clips with a variety of scene settings. 2.