Abstract
Geometric model fitting is a challenging but fundamen-tal computer vision problem. Recently, quantum optimiza-tion has been shown to enhance robust fitting for the case of a single model, while leaving the question of multi-model fitting open. In response to this challenge, this paper shows that the latter case can significantly benefit from quantum hardware and proposes the first quantum approach to multi-model fitting (MMF). We formulate MMF as a problem that can be efficiently sampled by modern adiabatic quan-tum computers without the relaxation of the objective func-tion. We also propose an iterative and decomposed ver-sion of our method, which supports real-world-sized prob-lems. The experimental evaluation demonstrates promising results on a variety of datasets. The source code is avail-able at: https://github.com/FarinaMatteo/qmmf. 1.

Introduction
Since the data volumes that AI technologies are required to process are continuously growing every year, the pressure to devise more powerful hardware solutions is also increas-ing. To face this challenge, a promising direction currently pursued both in academic research labs and in leading com-panies is to exploit the potential of quantum computing.
Such paradigm leverages quantum mechanical effects for computations and optimization, accelerating several impor-tant problems such as prime number factorization, database search [36] and combinatorial optimization [33]. The rea-son for such acceleration is that quantum computers lever-age quantum parallelism of qubits, i.e., the property that a quantum system can be in a superposition of multiple (ex-ponentially many) states and perform calculations simulta-neously on all of them.
Among the two quantum computing models, i.e., gate-based and Adiabatic Quantum Computers (AQCs), the lat-ter recently gained attention in the computer vision com-munity thanks to advances in experimental hardware real-izations [2, 6, 17, 34, 41, 51, 53]. At the present, AQCs pro-Figure 1. Left: Differences between our method and HQC-RF
[17]. While HQC-RF considers only a single model and is tested on quantum hardware with synthetic data, QUMF is also evaluated on real data on real quantum hardware. Although devised for mul-tiple models, our method supports a single model likewise. Right:
Qualitative results of QUMF on motion segmentation on the Ade-laideRMF dataset [49]. vide sufficient resources in terms of the number of qubits, qubit connectivity and admissible problem sizes which they can tackle [7], to be applied to a wide range of problems in computer vision. The AQC model is based on the adiabatic theorem of quantum mechanics [8] and designed for combi-natorial problems (including
-hard) that are notoriously difficult to solve on classical hardware. Modern AQCs oper-ate by optimizing objectives in the quadratic unconstrained binary optimization (QUBO) form (see Sec. 2). However, many relevant tasks in computer vision cannot be trivially expressed in this form. Hence, currently, two prominent research questions in the field are: 1) Which problems in computer vision could benefit from an AQC?, and 2) How can these problems be mapped to a QUBO form in order to use an AQC?
N P
Several efforts have been recently undertaken to bring classical vision problems in this direction. Notable exam-ples are works on graph matching [40, 41], multi-image matching [6], point-set registration [20, 34], object detec-tion [26], multi-object tracking [53], motion segmentation
[2] and robust fitting [17]. Focusing on geometric model fitting, Doan et al. [17] proposed an iterative consensus maximization approach to robustly fit a single geometric model to noisy data. This work was the first to demonstrate the advantages of quantum hardware in robust single-model fitting with error bounds, which is an important and chal-lenging problem with many applications in computer vision (e.g., template recognition in a point set). The authors pro-posed to solve a series of linear programs on an AQC and demonstrated promising results on synthetic data. They also showed experiments for fundamental matrix estimation and point triangulation using simulated annealing (SA) [25]. SA is a classical global optimization approach, that, in contrast to AQCs, can optimize arbitrary objectives and is a frequent choice when evaluating quantum approaches (see Sec. 2).
HQC-RF [17] takes advantage of the hypergraph formalism to robustly fit a single model. It is not straightforward to extend it to the scenario where multiple models are required to explain the data.
Multi-model fitting (MMF) is a relevant problem in many applications, such as 3D reconstruction, where it is employed to fit multiple rigid moving objects to initialize multi-body Structure from Motion [3, 37], or to produce in-termediate interpretations of reconstructed 3D point clouds by fitting geometric primitives [32]. Other scenarios in-clude face clustering, body-pose estimation, augmented re-ality and image stitching, to name a few.
This paper proposes QUMF, i.e., the first quantum MMF approach. We propose to leverage the advantages of AQCs in optimizing combinatorial QUBO objectives to explain the data with multiple and disjoint geometric models. Im-portantly, QUMF does not assume the number of disjoint models to be known in advance. Note that the potential ben-efit from AQCs for MMF is higher than in the single-model case: when considering multiple models the search space scales exponentially with their number, making the combi-natorial nature of the problem even more relevant. Further-more, we show that QUMF can be easily applied to single-model fitting even though not explicitly designed for this task. We perform an extensive experimental evaluation on quantum hardware with many large-scale real datasets and obtain competitive results with respect to both classical and quantum methods. Figure 1 depicts a visual comparison be-tween HQC-RF [17] and QUMF.
Contributions. In summary, the primary technical con-tributions of this paper are the following:
• We bring multi-model fitting, a fundamental computer vision problem with combinatorial nature, into AQCs;
• We introduce QUMF, demonstrating that it can be suc-cessfully used both for single and multiple models;
• We propose DEQUMF, a decomposition policy allow-ing our method to scale to large-scale problems, over-coming the limitations of modern quantum hardware.
The following section provides the background on AQCs and how to use them to solve QUBO problems. After intro-ducing QUMF and DEQUMF in Sec. 3, we discuss related work in Sec. 4. Experiments are given in Sec. 5. Limitations and Conclusion are reported in Sec. 6 and 7, respectively. 2.