Abstract
Hyperspectral image (HSI) classification aims at assign-ing a unique label for every pixel to identify categories of different land covers. Existing deep learning models for HSIs are usually performed in a traditional learning paradigm. Being emerging machines, quantum computers are limited in the noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) era. The quantum theory offers a new paradigm for de-signing deep learning models. Motivated by the quan-tum circuit (QC) model, we propose a quantum-inspired spectral-spatial network (QSSN) for HSI feature extraction.
The proposed QSSN consists of a phase-prediction module (PPM) and a measurement-like fusion module (MFM) in-spired from quantum theory to dynamically fuse spectral and spatial information. Specifically, QSSN uses a quantum representation to represent an HSI cuboid and extracts joint spectral-spatial features using MFM. An HSI cuboid and its phases predicted by PPM are used in the quantum represen-tation. Using QSSN as the building block, we further pro-pose an end-to-end quantum-inspired spectral-spatial pyra-mid network (QSSPN) for HSI feature extraction and classi-fication. In this pyramid framework, QSSPN progressively learns feature representations by cascading QSSN blocks and performs classification with a softmax classifier. It is the first attempt to introduce quantum theory in HSI pro-cessing model design. Substantial experiments are con-ducted on three HSI datasets to verify the superiority of the proposed QSSPN framework over the state-of-the-art meth-ods. 1.

Introduction
Hyperspectral images (HSIs) are always represented by three-order tensors that collected by remote sensors to record the characteristics reflected by land covers. Each
HSI contains two spatial dimensions and one spectral di-*Corresponding authors.
Figure 1. Performance comparison between the proposed QSSPN framework and existing methods. Average accuracies on Indian
Pines dataset are presented. mension to reflect abundant spectral information and spatial context, making it different from color images. HSI classifi-cation aims to determine land-cover categories of areas rep-resented by every pixel according to rich spatial and spectral information [21]. It has a broad range of applications, in-cluding target detection [42], mining [1] and agriculture [8].
Based on the recorded HSIs, samples in different categories may be extremely imbalanced in some data sets. This makes
HSI classification very challenging [20, 49].
In recent decades, a large number of HSI classifica-tion models have been proposed. Existing models can be divided into traditional learning methods and deep learn-ing methods. Traditional classification models are simply adopted for HSIs, such as support vector machine (SVM)
[27] and K-nearest neighbours (KNN) [19]. To achieve bet-ter results, advanced traditional learning models, e.g., ex-tended morphological profile (EMP) [3] and extended mul-tiattribute profile (EMAP) [7], first conduct feature extrac-tion and then perform classification. These methods are two-step learning models that cannot achieve satisfactory performance. Deep learning models are promising to si-multaneously conduct feature extraction and classification
in an end-to-end manner [12, 34]. Benefiting from the de-veloped technique, deep learning models for HSI classi-fication are in blossom. A wide variety of models rely on convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Most existing models are designed to separately extract spatial and spec-tral features in different branches [18, 47]. To enrich the development of deep learning models, attention mechanic
[26, 46], graph convolution network [45] and transformer learning [36, 43, 48] have been explored in recent works.
These works make significant improvement in architecture design and classification performance. However, they sepa-rately aggregate spatial and spectral information in different modules, resulting in model redundancy and inefficient ex-ploration of the correlation between spatial and spectral in-formation. Besides, they are all developed from traditional learning paradigm.
Different from traditional computers, quantum comput-ers are emerging machines to perform quantum algorithms
[2]. Quantum computing utilizes quantum theory to process data in quantum device [14, 28]. There are several models of quantum computation, such as quantum circuits, quan-tum annealing and adiabatic quantum computation. It has been proved that quantum computers outperform classical computers in solving certain problems [11, 33]. For ex-ample, Shor’s algorithm can be used to solve the integer factorization problem much faster than algorithms running on the classical computer [33]. In the noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) era [31], quantum computers cannot perform complex quantum algorithms for practical appli-cations. Fortunately, quantum computation provides a new mathematical formalism for computing. As a new learn-ing paradigm, quantum machine learning (QML) adopts quantum computation to enhance classical machine learn-ing models [4, 32]. Recently, quantum theory has been adopted in classical algorithms and deep learning models, with an expectation of improving computation efficiency and outcome quality [9, 38].
Motivated by quantum theory, in this paper, we first introduce a quantum-inspired spectral-spatial net-work (QSSN) for HSI feature extraction. The proposed
QSSN includes a phase-prediction module (PPM) and a measurement-like fusion module (MFM). Instead of fus-ing spatial and spectral information in different modules, we extract joint spatial-spectral features in the same op-eration. A small data cuboid taken from an HSI is rep-resented by quantum-inspired state representation, and the amplitudes in a state vector are values in normalized input cuboid. The corresponding phases are predicted by PPM, dynamically modulating the spatial and spectral correla-tions. MFM simultaneously aggregates spatial and spectral information to generate a feature cuboid. Additionally, we design a quantum-inspired spectral-spatial pyramid network (QSSPN) framework with multiple cascaded QSSN blocks and a softmax classifier for HSI classification. Deep pyra-mid structure of QSSPN gradually decreases the channels of feature cuboids and extracts robust and expressive fea-tures from original data for classification. This is a simple but efficient end-to-end framework taking advantage from both quantum theory and deep neural network.
The contributions of this article are summarized as fol-lows.
• As far as we know, QSSN and QSSPN are the first proposed quantum-inspired method for HSI feature ex-traction and classification. It shows that this quantum-inspired framework is promising.
• Motivated by QC in quantum theory, we propose a QSSN for HSI feature extraction. QSSN aggre-gates spatial-spectral information simultaneously us-ing quantum-like representations and operations.
• Based on QSSN, we develop a QSSPN for HSI classi-fication. In QSSPN, QSSN blocks stacked in a pyra-mid manner that can extract robust and discrimina-tive features for classification. As shown in Fig. 1,
QSSPN achieves the best classification accuracy with low model complexity.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Sec. 2 reviews the related work about deep learning-based HSI classification and quantum-inspired deep learning methods.
Sec. 3 introduces the detailed framework of QSSN and de-scribes the proposed QSSPN for HSI classification. Sec. 4 presents the experimental results and analysis. Finally,
Sec. 5 draws the conclusion. 2.