Abstract
Controllable image denoising aims to generate clean samples with human perceptual priors and balance sharp-ness and smoothness. In traditional filter-based denoising methods, this can be easily achieved by adjusting the fil-tering strength. However, for NN (Neural Network)-based models, adjusting the final denoising strength requires per-forming network inference each time, making it almost im-possible for real-time user interaction. In this paper, we in-troduce Real-time Controllable Denoising (RCD), the first deep image and video denoising pipeline that provides a fully controllable user interface to edit arbitrary denois-ing levels in real-time with only one-time network inference.
Unlike existing controllable denoising methods that require multiple denoisers and training stages, RCD replaces the last output layer (which usually outputs a single noise map) of an existing CNN-based model with a lightweight module that outputs multiple noise maps. We propose a novel Noise
Decorrelation process to enforce the orthogonality of the noise feature maps, allowing arbitrary noise level control through noise map interpolation. This process is network-free and does not require network inference. Our experi-ments show that RCD can enable real-time editable image and video denoising for various existing heavy-weight mod-els without sacrificing their original performance. 1.

Introduction
Image and video denoising are fundamental problems in computational photography and computer vision. With the development of deep neural networks [12, 26, 49, 59], model-based denoising methods have achieved tremendous success in generating clean images and videos with superior denoising scores [4,55,57]. However, it should be noted that the improvement in reconstruction accuracy (e.g., PSNR,
SSIM) is not always accompanied by an improvement in visual quality, which is known as the Perception-Distortion trade-off [6]. In traditional denoising approaches, we can easily adjust the denoising level by tuning related control
*Equal contribution.
Figure 1. Real-time controllable denoising allows users further tuning the restored results to achieve Perception-Distortion trade-off. A-B: tuning with changing denoising intensity. C-E: tuning without changing denoising intensity. parameters and deriving our preferred visual results. How-ever, for typical deep network methods, we can only restore the degraded image or video to a fixed output with a prede-termined restoration level.
In recent years, several modulation methods have been proposed to generate continuous restoration effects be-tween two pre-defined denoising levels. These methods can be categorized into two kinds: interpolation-based meth-ods [17,24,50,51], which use deep feature interpolation lay-ers, and condition-network-based methods, which import an extra condition network for denoising control [9, 25, 39].
Essentially, both types of methods are designed based on the observation that the outputs of the network change con-tinuously with the modulation of features/filters. This ob-servation enables deep denoising control, but it also intro-duces several limitations. First, there is a lack of explain-ability, as the relationship between the control parameters (how to modulate features) and the control operation (how the network outputs are changed) is unclear [24]. This in-dicates that black-box operators (network layers) must be used to encode them. Second, the use of control parame-ters as network inputs requires entire network propagation each time control parameters change, resulting in a lack of efficiency. Lastly, current modulation methods often re-quire an explicit degradation level during training, which is hard to obtain for real-world samples. As a result, cur-rent controllable denoising methods only focus on synthetic
users can edit their desired results on low-performance de-vices without the need for GPUs/DSPs.
Moreover, unlike previous methods that only support changing noise levels, RCD allows users to adjust denois-ing results at a specific noise level by providing a new in-terface to modify the noise generation strategy. RCD is also the first validated method for controllable denoising on real-world benchmarks. It is noteworthy that existing con-trollable methods typically require training data with fixed-level noise to establish their maximum and minimum noise levels, which makes them unsuitable for most real-world benchmarks comprising data with varying and unbalanced noise levels.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose RCD, a controllable denoising pipeline that firstly supports real-time denoising control (> 2000× speedup compared to conventional controllable methods) and larger control capacity (more than just intensity) without multiple training stages [24] and auxiliary networks [50].
• RCD is the first method supporting controllable de-noising on real-world benchmarks.
• We propose a general Noise Decorrelation technique to estimate editable noises.
• We achieve comparable or better results on widely-image-denoising and video-used real/synthetic denoising datasets with minimal additional computa-tional cost. 2.