Abstract termed MPEblink that
Real-time eyeblink detection in the wild can widely serve for fatigue detection, face anti-spoofing, emotion analysis, etc. The existing research efforts generally focus on single-person cases towards trimmed video. However, multi-person scenario within untrimmed videos is also impor-tant for practical applications, which has not been well concerned yet. To address this, we shed light on this re-search field for the first time with essential contributions on dataset, theory, and practices. In particular, a large-scale dataset involves 686 untrimmed videos with 8748 eyeblink events is proposed under multi-person conditions. The samples are captured from uncon-strained films to reveal “in the wild” characteristics. Mean-while, a real-time multi-person eyeblink detection method is also proposed. Being different from the existing counter-parts, our proposition runs in a one-stage spatio-temporal way with end-to-end learning capacity. Specifically, it si-multaneously addresses the sub-tasks of face detection, face tracking, and human instance-level eyeblink detection. This paradigm holds 2 main advantages: (1) eyeblink features can be facilitated via the face’s global context (e.g., head pose and illumination condition) with joint optimization and interaction, and (2) addressing these sub-tasks in par-allel instead of sequential manner can save time remarkably to meet the real-time running requirement. Experiments on
MPEblink verify the essential challenges of real-time multi-person eyeblink detection in the wild for untrimmed video.
Our method also outperforms existing approaches by large margins and with a high inference speed.
†Yang Xiao is corresponding author (Yang Xiao@hust.edu.cn).
Figure 1. The illustration on multi-person eyeblink detection. This task aims at being aware of the presence of people and detecting their eyeblink activities at instance level. 1.

Introduction
Real-time eyeblink detection in the wild is a recently emerged challenging research task [19] that can widely serve for fatigue detection [2], face anti-spoofing [34], af-fective analysis [7], etc. Although remarkable progress has been made [9, 10, 19], the existing methods generally fo-cus on single-person cases within trimmed videos. Multi-person scenario within untrimmed videos has not been well concerned yet. However, detecting long-term eyeblink be-haviors at multi-instance level is more preferred for some practical application scenarios. For example, it can be used to estimate attendees’ attention level and emotional state change during social interaction [9, 33]. Thus, effective and real-time multi-person eyeblink detection in the wild for untrimmed video is indeed required.
To this end, we shed the light on this research problem with essential contributions on dataset, theory, and prac-tices. First, a challenging labeled multi-person eyeblink de-tection benchmark termed MPEblink is built under in-the-wild conditions. It consists of 686 untrimmed long videos captured from unconstrained movies to reveal the “in the wild” characteristics. The contained scenarios are realistic and diverse, such as social interactions and group activi-ties. To our knowledge, MPEblink is the first multi-person eyeblink detection dataset that focuses on in-the-wild long videos. Fig. 1 illustrates a sample video with ground truth annotations within it. Different from the existing eyeblink detection benchmarks [10, 12, 19], the proposed benchmark aims at being aware of all the attendees along the whole video and detecting their eyeblinks at instance level.
In summary, MPEblink is featured with multi-instance, uncon-strained, and untrimmed, which makes it more challenging and realistic than previous formulations.
To perform eyeblink detection, previous methods [9, 10, 12, 19, 40] generally take a sequential approach contain-ing face detection, face tracking, and classification on the pre-extracted local eye clues within a temporal window.
Whereas such a pipeline seems reasonable, it has several critical drawbacks. First, the use of isolated components may lead to sub-optimal results as they are not jointly op-timized and it is inefficient due to the inability to reuse the features of each stage. Second, the eyeblink features only contain the information from the pre-extracted local eye clues (i.e., a small part of face), lacking the useful infor-mation from global face context such as head pose and illu-mination condition that are crucial for detecting eyeblinks in the wild. Moreover, the pre-extracted local eye clues are also unreliable due to the localization challenge towards un-constrained scenarios. Third, the sequential approach leads to computational cost being sensitive to the subject amount, which is hard to meet the real-time running requirement.
To tackle these issues, we propose a one-stage multi-person eyeblink detection framework called InstBlink, which can simultaneously detect human faces, track them over time, and do eyeblink detection at instance level. Inst-Blink takes inspiration from the existing query-based meth-ods [41, 45, 47, 48] and models the spatio-temporal face as well as eyeblink representations at instance level within each query. The insight is that the features can be effectively shared among these sub-tasks and the eyeblink features can be facilitated via face’s global contexts (e.g., head pose and illumination condition) with joint optimization and interac-tion, especially in unconstrained in-the-wild cases. Exper-iments verify the superiority of InstBlink in both effective-ness and efficiency, while also highlighting the critical chal-lenges of real-time multi-person eyeblink detection in the wild for untrimmed video.
The main contributions of this work lie in 3 folders:
• To our knowledge, it is the first time that instance-level multi-person eyeblink detection in untrimmed videos is for-mally defined and explored;
• We introduce an unconstrained multi-person eyeblink detection dataset MPEblink that contains 686 untrimmed videos with 8748 eyeblink events, featured with more re-alistic and challenging.
• We propose a one-stage multi-person eyeblink detec-tion method that can jointly perform face detection, track-ing, and instance-level eyeblink detection. Such a task-joint paradigm can benefit the sub-tasks uniformly. 2.