Abstract
Federated learning can coordinate multiple users to par-ticipate in data training while ensuring data privacy. The collaboration of multiple agents allows for a natural con-nection between federated learning and collective intelli-gence. When there are large differences in data distri-bution among clients, it is crucial for federated learning to design a reliable client selection strategy and an inter-pretable client communication framework to better utilize group knowledge. Herein, a reliable personalized federated learning approach, termed RIPFL, is proposed and fully in-terpreted from the perspective of social learning. RIPFL reliably selects and divides the clients involved in training such that each client can use different amounts of social information and more effectively communicate with other clients. Simultaneously, the method effectively integrates personal information with the social information generated by the global model from the perspective of Bayesian de-cision rules and evidence theory, enabling individuals to grow better with the help of collective wisdom. An inter-pretable federated learning mind is well scalable, and the experimental results indicate that the proposed method has superior robustness and accuracy than other state-of-the-art federated learning algorithms. 1.

Introduction
Federated learning is a new machine learning technique with various applications in data privacy protection and data security [19, 21, 37].
It can be viewed as social learning involving multiple agents coinciding with collective intelli-gence [3, 11, 13]. Unlike ordinary federated learning, per-sonalized federated learning can address the problem of data heterogeneity among clients and thereby improve their capabilities in relatively more realistic scenarios [4, 18].
However, designing a reliable and interpretable federated learning framework remains a significant challenge in the
*Corresponding author.
Figure 1. Cooperation between clients. Uninterpretable simple ag-gregation produces a global model that is not helpful for all clients because the information containing classes 2 and 3 may be nega-tive for client 4, as well as for clients 1 and 4. Clients 1 and 2 can well identify classes 1, 2, 3, and 4; however, unreliable random selection does not guarantee the participation of clients 1 and 2 in aggregation, whereas the simultaneous selection of less-capable clients such as clients 3 and 4 does. In this case, smart customers cannot offer more help to the not-so-smart ones. field of federated learning. FedProx [32], SCAFFOLD [15],
MOON [17] used the global model to impose different con-straints on the client’s local training process. Consequently, the knowledge of the global model was better absorbed.
Although [6, 33, 40] solved the problem of client het-erogeneity in a personalized federated learning framework by incorporating techniques such as clustering and knowl-edge distillation. [22, 35] propose a certain degree of inter-pretable client aggregation from the perspective of client contribution to the group. However, their selection and training of clients are often unreliable and uninterpretable, resulting in uncertainty in the training process and a ten-dency to ignore synergies between clients when the number of clients is large and the data distribution widely varies.
Consequently, the collective intelligence is underutilized, as shown in Fig. 1.
Herein, we propose a reliable and interpretable feder-ated learning framework, RIPFL. Specifically, we introduce
Dempster–Shafer evidence theory (DST) [20, 34] to quan-tify the uncertainty and performance of each client and pro-vide reliable client selection strategies. To reliably explain client choices and aggregation methods without wasting collective intelligence, RIPFL ensures that all smart clients participate in the aggregation process while a small num-ber of nonsmart individuals participate, to enable that nons-mart clients can adequately gain more valuable collective knowledge from smart clients. Moreover, a method that can reliably integrate social and personal information is pro-posed. The proposed framework is primarily applicable to situations where the number of clients is large and the tasks solved by clients are complex. The main contributions of this paper are as follows.
• This paper proposes a reliable and interpretable per-sonalized FL architecture from the perspective of so-cial learning, which consists of interpretable local training, reliable clients selection and division, and ef-fective federated aggregation.
• To reliably select the required clients, this paper intro-duces evidence theory to the local training of clients, thus quantifying the uncertainty of each client and pro-viding interpretable training methods.
• A Bayesian-rule-based evidence fusion method is in-troduced by considering the global model as the prior information of clients when there are differences in the data distribution among clients. Consequently, the knowledge of the global model is not forgotten by clients in local training. 2.