Abstract
This work presents the restoration of drawings of wooden built heritage. Hand-drawn drawings contain the most important original information but are often severely degraded over time. A novel restoration method based on the vector quantized variational autoencoders is presented.
Latent space representations of drawings and noise are learned, which are used to map noisy drawings to clean drawings for restoration and to generate authentic noisy drawings for data augmentation. The proposed method is applied to the drawings archived in the Cultural Heritage
Administration. Restored drawings show significant quality improvement and allow more accurate interpretations of in-formation. 1.

Introduction
Cultural heritage is a valuable asset of humanity that requires our efforts to preserve archaeological, historical, cultural, and technological values. In particular, traditional wooden buildings are vulnerable to deformation, earth-quakes, and fires. We continuously collect and manage ar-chitectural drawings, photos, and 3D scan data of individual buildings for preservation and restoration. Among them, ar-chitectural drawings in the past contain initial information on traditional wooden builds, and their value is the most significant. However, many archived drawings in the form of scanned images are already degraded over time, making it difficult to interpret information due to noise and damage.
There is a need to restore aged drawings to facilitate infor-mation interpretation. This work reports an effort to restore aged drawings of wooden built heritage archived by the Cul-tural Heritage Administration.
Aged drawings in the archive often show compound degradation with faded and deteriorated lines, smeared and blurred complex parts, and the background in faded color with smudged leakages from adjacent drawings. Restora-tion requires removing noise in the background, linking bro-ken lines, and clearing up complex parts. A learning-based restoration method would be a good match since it can model such complicated degradation. However, while clean and noisy drawings are abundant, clean and noisy pairs of the same drawings are scarce. Modeling and restora-tion by supervised learning would be problematic. Syn-thetically generated clean and degraded image pairs can be used. [10, 16, 21–23] But the domain gap between the syn-thetically degraded drawings and the actual aged drawings may cause inferior restoration performance.
In this work, we proposed a vector quantized variational autoencoder [13] (VQ-VAE) based restoration method to restore aged hand-drawn architectural drawings. The pro-posed method consists of two stages. In the first stage, a
VQ-VAE is trained to learn accurate latent space represen-tations of clean drawings using a large set of clean draw-ings. In the second stage, a mapping of latent space vari-ables of noisy drawings to those of clean drawings as well as the generator that produces realistic degraded drawings is learned. Degradation generator is trained to generate a noisy drawing with the residual mapping error as an input.
The latent space mapping is learned using a set of draw-ing pairs, for which we use the outputs of the degradation generator as data augmentation. Noisy drawings generated by the degradation generator provide authentic variations of degradations clean drawings can suffer. Hence, the latent space mapping from noisy to clean drawings is more accu-rately learned, and the detrimental effect on the restoration performance caused by the domain gap can be mitigated.
The proposed method is applied to restore archived aged architectural drawings of traditional wooden build-ings. Restoration performance was compared to other meth-ods developed for heavy degradations of drawings and pho-tographs. The proposed methods reported significant im-provement in both quantitative measures and qualitative evaluations. The performance gain is the most apparent with actual aged drawings from the archives. The proposed degradation generator produced more authentic degraded
drawings than other generative methods. The data augmen-tation with the degradation generator during the training al-lowed accurate latent space mapping could be learned for the restoration.
The following can summarize the novelty of the pro-posed method. i) an effective VQ-VAE based restoration method for aged architectural drawings was proposed. ii) significant improvement in restoration performance was achieved in both quantitative measures and subjective eval-uations compared to existing learning based restoration methods, and iii) a degradation generator, which generates more realistic degradation, was developed for data augmen-tation to generalize the model. 2.