Abstract
Most existing approaches for point cloud normal esti-mation aim to locally fit a geometric surface and calcu-late the normal from the fitted surface. Recently, learning-based methods have adopted a routine of predicting point-wise weights to solve the weighted least-squares surface fitting problem. Despite achieving remarkable progress, these methods overlook the approximation error of the fit-ting problem, resulting in a less accurate fitted surface. In this paper, we first carry out in-depth analysis of the ap-proximation error in the surface fitting problem. Then, in order to bridge the gap between estimated and precise sur-face normals, we present two basic design principles: 1) ap-plies the Z-direction Transform to rotate local patches for a better surface fitting with a lower approximation error; 2) models the error of the normal estimation as a learn-able term. We implement these two principles using deep neural networks, and integrate them with the state-of-the-art (SOTA) normal estimation methods in a plug-and-play manner. Extensive experiments verify our approaches bring benefits to point cloud normal estimation and push the fron-tier of state-of-the-art performance on both synthetic and real-world datasets. The code is available at https:// github.com/hikvision-research/3DVision. 1.

Introduction
Surface normal estimation on point clouds can offer ad-ditional local geometric information for numerous applica-tions, such as denoising [11, 23, 24], segmentation [28–30], registration [9, 17, 27, 33], and surface reconstruction [10, 15, 18, 25, 41]. However, raw-scanned point clouds tend to be incomplete, noisy, and non-uniform, which poses a chal-lenge in accurately estimating surface normals amidst noise, density variations, and missing structures.
Normal estimation on point clouds is a long-standing re-*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Corresponding author.
Figure 1. The error heatmap of point cloud normal estimation. The first row is produced by three SOTA surface fitting methods, while the second row shows the results of integrating our method with them. The bottom values indicate the corresponding normal angle root mean square error (RMSE) . Both quantitative and qualitative results demonstrate that our proposed method provides more pre-cise normal estimation. search topic. The majority of traditional methods [6, 8, 12, 15, 20] aim to fit a local geometric surface (e.g., plane, jet and spherical) around a specific point, and infer the normal from the fitted surface. However, these methods require to carefully tune the setting of parameters, such as point neigh-borhood sizes, which is sensitive to noise and outliers. With the power of deep neural networks, many learning-based approaches [4, 5, 13, 14, 31, 37, 40] have been proposed to regress surface normal vectors directly, achieving promising performance improvements over traditional methods. How-ever, these approaches exhibit limited generalization capa-bility when applied to real-world point clouds.
More recently, several approaches [3, 21, 42] have gen-eralized the truncated Taylor expansion (n-jet) surface
model [8] to the learning-based regime, formulating normal estimation as a weighted least-squares problem with learn-able weights. In these methods, the point-wise weights of a local surface patch are predicted by a deep neural network, which can control the importance of neighboring points to the fitted surface and alleviate the sensitivity to outliers and noise. Then, the solution of weighted least-squares fitting problem can be expressed in a closed form, which enables to estimate the geometric surface and infer the surface normal.
These methods heavily constrain the solution space and ob-tain a better result for surface normal estimation. Neverthe-less, none of them theoretically analyzes the approximation error in surface fitting, leading to a suboptimal normal esti-mation performance. In some sense, a smaller approxima-tion error represents a more precise estimation. Therefore, we aim to study how to reduce the approximation error and fit a more accurate surface for normal estimation.
In this paper, we analyze the approximation error in the n-jet surface model, and find the existing gap between esti-mated and accurate normals in previous methods. Specif-ically, the truncated Taylor expansion polynomial is ex-pected to be equivalent to the height function of the surface, and the accuracy of the reminder term in Taylor expansion has an impact on the precision of normal estimation. As pointed out in [8], to improve the accuracy, a feasible way is to set up a coordinate system where z direction is aligned (has the minimum angle) with the estimated normal. How-ever, we find the previous methods cannot accomplish this objective well, leading to a large estimation error in most cases. Besides, due to the presence of the reminder term and the imperfect data (inevitably containing outliers and noise), it is impossible to achieve an accurate surface fitting without any approximation error. To solve these problems, we propose two basic design principles. First, we apply the z-direction transformation to rotate local patches for a bet-ter surface fitting with a lower approximation error. Second, the error of normal estimation is modeled as a term that can be learned in a data-driven manner. The proposed princi-ples can improve the accuracy of the surface fitting, thereby leading to a more precise estimation of surface normals.
To model the above two principles, we implement them with deep neural networks, and introduce two simple yet effective methods: Z-direction Transformation and Normal
Error Estimation. More specifically, the z-direction trans-formation is fulfilled by adding a constraint on the angle between the rotated normal and the z axis, which aims to align the rotated normal with the z direction. To achieve this learning objective, we also design a graph-convolution based alignment transformation network to fully exploit the local neighborhood information for learning a better point transformation. Then, the rough estimated normal can be inferred by any existing polynomial surface fitting method, such as DeepFit [3] and GraphFit [21]. Finally, we design a normal error estimation module that learns a residual term based on the rough estimated result and thus improves the precision of normal estimation.
We conduct comprehensive experiments to verify the ef-fectiveness of our methods on point cloud normal estima-tion. The proposed two basic design principles are imple-mented with the existing polynomial surface fitting meth-ods. The experimental results demonstrate our design prin-ciples are beneficial to these methods with few extra bur-dens. As shown in Fig. 1, an obvious improvement can be achieved by our proposed methods for normal estimation.
The contributions of this paper are summarized as:
• We provide an in-depth analysis of the approximation error in n-jet surface fitting, and introduce two basic design principles to improve the precision of 3D sur-face fitting.
• We implement the design principles with neural net-works and propose two approaches, i.e., z-direction transformation and normal error estimation, which can be flexibly integrated with the current polynomial sur-face fitting methods for point cloud normal estimation.
• We conduct extensive experiments to show the im-provements by the proposed methods. The experimen-tal results demonstrate our methods consistently bring benefits and push the frontier of SOTA performance. 2.