Abstract
We propose an accurate and fast bundle adjustment (BA) solution that estimates the 6-DoF pose with an independent
RS model of the camera and the geometry of the environ-ment based on measurements from a rolling shutter (RS) camera. This tackles the challenges in the existing works, namely, relying on high frame rate video as input, restric-tive assumptions on camera motion and poor efﬁciency. To this end, we ﬁrst verify the positive inﬂuence of the image point normalization to RSBA. Then we present a novel vi-sual residual covariance model to standardize the repro-jection error during RSBA, which consequently improves the overall accuracy. Besides, we demonstrate the com-bination of Normalization and covariance standardization
Weighting in RSBA (NW-RSBA) can avoid common planar degeneracy without the need to constrain the ﬁlming man-ner. Finally, we propose an acceleration strategy for NW-RSBA based on the sparsity of its Jacobian matrix and Schur complement. The extensive synthetic and real data experi-ments verify the effectiveness and efﬁciency of the proposed solution over the state-of-the-art works. 1.

Introduction
Bundle adjustment (BA) is the problem of simultane-ously reﬁning the cameras’ relative pose and the observed points’ coordinate in the scene by minimizing the reprojec-tion errors over images and points [8]. It has made great success in the past two decades as a vital step for two 3D computer vision applications: structure-from-motion (SfM) and simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM).
The CMOS camera has been widely equipped with the rolling shutter (RS) due to its inexpensive cost, lower en-∗ Authors contributed equally
† Corresponding author: yizhenlao@hnu.edu.cn
Project page: https://delinqu.github.io/NW-RSBA
Figure 1. Images were captured at the same time with fast motion with (a) global shutter and (b) rolling shutter in sequence 10 of the
TUM-RSVI dataset [21]. (c) classical Orb-SLAM [18] with GS input. (d) classical Orb-SLAM [18] with RS input. (e) Orb-SLAM with NM-RSBA [2]. (f) Orb-SLAM with proposed NW-RSBA. ergy consumption, and higher frame rate. Compared with the CCD camera and its global shutter (GS) counterpart, RS camera is exposed in a scanline-by-scanline fashion. Conse-quently, as shown in Fig. 1(a)(b), images captured by mov-ing RS cameras produce distortions known as the RS ef-fect [17], which defeats vital steps (e.g. absolute [1] and relative [4] pose estimation) in SfM and SLAM, including
BA [2, 9, 11, 12, 14]. Hence, handling the RS effect in BA is crucial for 3D computer vision applications. 1.1.