Abstract
We introduce a non-local graph attention network (NL-GAT), which generates a novel global descriptor through two sub-networks for robust 3D shape classiﬁcation.
In the ﬁrst sub-network, we capture the global relationships between points (i.e., point-point features) by designing a global relationship network (GRN). In the second sub-network, we enhance the local features with a geometric shape attention map obtained from a global structure net-work (GSN). To keep rotation invariant and extract more information from sparse point clouds, all sub-networks use the Gram matrices with different dimensions as input for working with robust classiﬁcation. Additionally, GRN ef-fectively preserves the low-frequency features and improves the classiﬁcation results. Experimental results on various datasets exhibit that the classiﬁcation effect of the NLGAT model is better than other state-of-the-art models. Espe-cially, in the case of sparse point clouds (64 points) with noise under arbitrary SO(3) rotation, the classiﬁcation re-sult (85.4%) of NLGAT is improved by 39.4% compared with the best development of other methods. 1.

Introduction 3D shape classiﬁcation is one of the most critical tasks in 3D computer vision and computer graphics [7,10,18,37].
As 3D point cloud models are more accessible due to the rapid development of 3D scanning technology, their clas-siﬁcations have attracted considerable attention in the last two decades [9, 14, 39].
The essential task for shape classiﬁcation is to ﬁnd a global descriptor for the input point cloud. Mainstream neu-ral networks have achieved excellent performance in point cloud classiﬁcation on manually processed and aligned
∗Corresponding author. data [15, 20, 25, 27, 35]. However, their performance tends to drop dramatically for complex real-world point clouds, which can be rotated (arbitrary orientation), sparse (with many missing parts), and noisy. Although there are methods for one or several states of complex point clouds classiﬁca-tion through hand-crafted features, their global descriptors depend on the designed features [12, 29, 30, 38].
The reasons why current methods do not work well for complex point clouds are two folds. First, these methods tend to adopt aggregation operations of local features, by stacking hundreds of network layers as those in images [24], to obtain the global feature. Actually, it is difﬁcult due to the point cloud network models using the point coordinates as input, and it will lead to feature homogenization, especially for the complex point clouds. Second, most of the meth-ods are not end-to-end and partially rely on the designed hand-crafted features, which can hardly capture the global information of the complex point clouds [2,5,31,32,36,41].
To this end, we propose an end-to-end deep learning network model built on complex point clouds, which con-sist of two global feature learning sub-networks for robust classiﬁcation. In our model, we construct Gram matrices with different dimensions based on the input point coordi-nates for keeping rotation invariant, capturing crucial fea-tures (including local and non-local information with simi-lar structures) from noisy and sparse point clouds. The ﬁrst sub-network based on multi-scale local Gram matrices is to extract the global relationships of point-point features in a shallow network layer through the network channel fusion operation (i.e., channel attention mechanism). The second sub-network generates an attention map for enhancing the global relationships, from the global structure of a Gram matrix constructed by a whole point cloud. Finally, three fully connected (FC) layers receive the results learned on two sub-networks to generate a global descriptor for robust classiﬁcation tasks.
Contributions. Our contributions are summarized as fol-lows.
• The global descriptor obtained by our method can well capture both the global relationship and global struc-ture, which outperforms existing methods in the task of classiﬁcation for complex point clouds.
• We design an end-to-end deep learning network model, consisting of speciﬁc function modules in two global feature learning sub-networks. Our proposed modules, based on multi-scale Gram matrices constructed by the point coordinates, can gather lots of information for sparse point clouds, preserve valuable low-frequency features for noisy point clouds, and guarantee invari-ance to any rotational transformations. 2.