Abstract 1.

Introduction
The goal of non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging is to image objects occluded from the camera’s field of view using mul-tiply scattered light. Recent works have demonstrated the feasibility of two-bounce (2B) NLOS imaging by scanning a laser and measuring cast shadows of occluded objects in scenes with two relay surfaces. In this work, we study the role of time-of-flight (ToF) measurements, i.e. transients, in 2B-NLOS under multiplexed illumination. Specifically, we study how ToF information can reduce the number of mea-surements and spatial resolution needed for shape recon-struction. We present our findings with respect to trade-offs in (1) temporal resolution, (2) spatial resolution, and (3) number of image captures by studying SNR and recov-erability as functions of system parameters. This leads to a formal definition of the mathematical constraints for 2B lidar. We believe that our work lays an analytical ground-work for design of future NLOS imaging systems, especially as ToF sensors become increasingly ubiquitous.
Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging aims to reconstruct objects occluded from direct line of sight and has the po-tential to be transformative in numerous applications across autonomous driving, search and rescue, and non-invasive medical imaging [24]. The key approach is to measure light that has undergone multiple surface scattering events and computationally invert these measurements to estimate hid-den geometries. Recent work used two-bounce light, as shown in Fig. 2a, to reconstruct high quality shapes behind occluders [15]. The key idea is that two-bounce light cap-tures information about the shadows of the occluded object.
By scanning the laser source at different points l on a relay surface and measuring multiple shadow images, it is possi-ble to reconstruct the hidden object by computing the visual hull [20] of the measured shadows.
Benefits of Two-Bounce Two-bounce (2B) light can be captured using two relay surfaces on opposite sides of the hidden scene (Fig. 1a). This can occur in a variety of real-world settings such as tunnels, hallways, streets, and clut-Scope of This Work All data used for this work is from simulation and a single-pixel SPAD sensor. We do not phys-ically realize few-shot results in this paper due to limited availability of high-resolution SPAD arrays presently. In-stead, we emulate SPAD array measurements by scanning a single-pixel SPAD across the field of view and and emu-late multiplexed illumination by scanning a laser spot, ac-quiring individual transient images, and summing the im-ages in post-processing. These measurements, however, are more conducive to our goal of performing analysis that ex-plores the landscape of possibilities in NLOS imaging with advances in ToF sensors. We believe that the ideas and anal-ysis introduced in this work will be increasingly relevant as
SPAD array technology matures [19, 26, 44]. 2.