Abstract
Multi-view clustering has hitherto been studied due to their effectiveness in dealing with heterogeneous data. De-spite the empirical success made by recent works, there still exists several severe challenges. Particularly, previous multi-view clustering algorithms seldom consider the topo-logical structure in data, which is essential for clustering data on manifold. Moreover, existing methods cannot fully explore the consistency of local structures between different views as they uncover the clustering structure in a intra-view way instead of a inter-view manner. In this paper, we propose to exploit the implied data manifold by learning the topological structure of data. Besides, considering that the consistency of multiple views is manifested in the gen-erally similar local structure while the inconsistent struc-tures are the minority, we further explore the intersections of multiple views in the sample level such that the cross-view consistency can be better maintained. We model the above concerns in a unified framework and design an efficient al-gorithm to solve the corresponding optimization problem.
Experimental results on various multi-view datasets certifi-cate the effectiveness of the proposed method and verify its superiority over other SOTA approaches. 1.

Introduction
In many real scenarios, data are usually collected from diverse sources in various domains or described by multi-ple feature sets [1, 2]. A case in point is the image dataset, which can be represented by different visual descriptors, such as LBP, GIST, CENTRIST, HOG, SIFT and Color Mo-ment [3]. Moreover, a document can be written in differ-ent languages, and a website can be described by its link-age, page content, etc. These data are generally known as multi-view data [1, 4]. Each view contains partial and com-plementary information, any of which suffices for learning, and they all together agree to a consensus latent represen-tation [5–7]. Multi-view clustering aims to accurately par-*Corresponding author. tition data into distinct clusters according to their compati-ble and complementary information embedded in heteroge-neous features [1, 8].
In general, multi-view clustering methods can be di-vided into four categories according to the mechanisms and principles on which these methods are based. [1] ini-tiated the trend of co-training algorithm by first carrying out a co-training strategy and making the clustering re-sults on all view tend to each other as well as satisfying the broadest agreement across all views. Owing to the ef-ficiency of exploiting similarities among multiple views, multi-kernel learning is widely utilized to boost the perfor-mance of multi-view clustering methods [9–11]. Multi-task multi-view clustering [12,13] inherits the property of multi-task clustering. Each view of the data is treated with at least one related task. Moreover, inter-task knowledge is trans-ferred from one to another so that the relationship between multi-view and multi-task is fully exploited to improve the clustering outcomes. Another kind of graph-based multi-view clustering methods usually attempt to explore an opti-mal consensus graph across all views, and utilize graph-cut algorithm on the optimal graph to obtain final clustering re-sult [3, 5, 14].
A great number of multi-view clustering methods have been proposed and illustrated remarkable empirical suc-cesses up to now [15–17]. However, there are still severe drawbacks urgently need to be overcome. For one thing, existing multi-view clustering algorithms seldom consider the topological structure in data, which is essential for clus-tering data on manifold. Considering that the data sampled from real world typically lie in the nonlinear manifold, data points geometrically far from one to another may keep high consistency when they are linked by a series of consecutive neighbors. For another, they suffer from a coarse-grained problem that ignores the view correlation between samples.
Note that redundancy or partial structure mistakes in certain views may lead to a sub-optimal cluster structure. Besides, traditional view-wise fusion strategy would result in a su-perimposition of redundancies, and hence acquire a more imprecise common cluster structure.
Regarding the above issues, we propose to exploit the
implied data manifold by learning the topological structure of data. Besides, considering that the consistency of multi-ple views is manifested in the generally similar local struc-ture while the inconsistent structures are the minority, we further explore the intersections of multiple views in the sample level such that the cross-view consistency can be better maintained. By leveraging the subtasks of topologi-cal relevance learning and the sample-level graph fusion in our collaborative model, each subtask is alternately boosted towards an optimal solution. Experimental results on var-ious multi-view datasets certificate the effectiveness of the proposed method. 2.