Abstract
Training deep models for semantic scene completion (SSC) is challenging due to the sparse and incomplete in-put, a large quantity of objects of diverse scales as well as the inherent label noise for moving objects. To address the above-mentioned problems, we propose the following three solutions: 1) Redesigning the completion sub-network. We design a novel completion sub-network, which consists of several Multi-Path Blocks (MPBs) to aggregate multi-scale features and is free from the lossy downsampling opera-tions. 2) Distilling rich knowledge from the multi-frame model. We design a novel knowledge distillation objective, dubbed Dense-to-Sparse Knowledge Distillation (DSKD).
It transfers the dense, relation-based semantic knowledge from the multi-frame teacher to the single-frame student, signiﬁcantly improving the representation learning of the single-frame model. 3) Completion label rectiﬁcation. We propose a simple yet effective label rectiﬁcation strategy, which uses off-the-shelf panoptic segmentation labels to re-move the traces of dynamic objects in completion labels, greatly improving the performance of deep models espe-cially for those moving objects. Extensive experiments are conducted in two public SSC benchmarks, i.e., Se-manticKITTI and SemanticPOSS. Our SCPNet ranks 1st on
SemanticKITTI semantic scene completion challenge and surpasses the competitive S3CNet [3] by 7.2 mIoU. SCP-Net also outperforms previous completion algorithms on the
SemanticPOSS dataset. Besides, our method also achieves competitive results on SemanticKITTI semantic segmenta-tion tasks, showing that knowledge learned in the scene completion is beneﬁcial to the segmentation task. 1.

Introduction
Semantic scene completion (SSC) [20] aims at inferring
†: Corresponding author. both geometry and semantics of the scene from an incom-plete and sparse observation, which is a crucial component in 3D scene understanding. Performing semantic scene completion in the outdoor scenarios is challenging due to the sparse and incomplete input, a large quantity of objects of diverse scales as well as the inherent label noise for those moving objects (See Fig. 1 (a)).
Recent years have witnessed an explosion of methods in the outdoor scene completion ﬁeld [3, 19, 22, 25, 29, 32].
For example, S3CNet [3] performs 2D and 3D completion tasks jointly and achieves impressive performance on Se-manticKITTI [1]. JS3C-Net [29] performs semantic seg-mentation ﬁrst and then feeds the segmentation features to the completion sub-network. The coarse-to-ﬁne reﬁnement module is further put forward to improve the completion quality. Although signiﬁcant progress has been achieved in this area, these methods heavily rely on the voxelwise completion labels and show unsatisfactory completion per-formance on the small, distant objects and crowded scenes.
Moreover, the long traces of dynamic objects in original completion labels will hamper the learning of completion models, which is overlooked in the previous literature [20].
To address the preceding problems, we propose three solutions from the aspects of the completion sub-network redesign, distillation of multi-frame knowledge as well as completion label rectiﬁcation. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst make a comprehensive overhaul of the completion sub-network.
We adopt the completion-ﬁrst principle and make the com-pletion module directly process the raw voxel features. Be-sides, we avoid the use of downsampling operations since they inevitably introduce information loss and cause se-vere misclassiﬁcation for those small objects and crowded scenes. To improve the completion quality on objects of di-verse scales, we design Multi-Path Blocks (MPBs) with var-ied kernel sizes, which aggregate multi-scale features and fully utilize the rich contextual information.
Second, to combat against the sparse and incomplete in-put signals, we make the single-scan student model distil knowledge from the multi-frame teacher model. However,
mIoU (%)
SCPNet (36.7) 35 30 25 20 15
S3CNet (29.5)
JS3CNet (23.8)
Local-DIFs (22.7)
TS3D+DNet+SATNet (17.7)
SSA-SC (23.5)
UDNet (19.5)
LMSCNet-SS (17.6)
ESSCNet (17.5)
SSCNet-Full (16.1) 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 (c) (a) (b)
Figure 1. Left: challenges of semantic scene completion, i.e., (a) sparse and incomplete input, varying completion difﬁculty for objects of diverse scales and (b) long traces of dynamic objects in completion labels. Traces of cars and persons are highlighted by yellow ellipses.
Right: (c) performance comparison of various completion algorithms on SemanticKITTI semantic scene completion challenge. mimicking the probabilistic knowledge of each point/voxel brings marginal gains.
Instead, we propose to distill the pairwise similarity information. Considering the sparsity and unorderness of features, we align the features using their indices and then force the consistency between the pairwise similarity maps of student features and those of teacher features, make the student beneﬁt from the rela-tional knowledge of the teacher. The resulting Dense-to-Sparse Knowledge Distillation objective is termed DSKD, which is speciﬁcally designed for the scene completion task.
Finally, to address the long traces of those dynamic ob-jects in the completion labels, we propose a simple yet effective label rectiﬁcation strategy. The core idea is to use off-the-shelf panoptic segmentation labels to remove the traces of dynamic objects in completion labels. The rectiﬁed completion labels are more accurate and reliable, greatly improving the completion qualities of deep models on those moving objects.
We conduct experiments on two large-scale outdoor scene completion benchmarks, i.e., SemanticKITTI [1] and SemanticPOSS [16]. Our SCPNet ranks 1st on Se-manticKITTI semantic scene completion challenge 1 and outperforms the S3CNet [3] by 7.2 mIoU. SCPNet also achieves better performance than other completion algo-rithms on the SemanticPOSS dataset. The learned knowl-edge from the completion task also beneﬁts the segmenta-tion task, making our SCPNet achieve superior performance on the SemanticKITTI semantic segmentation task.
Our contributions are summarized as follows.
• The comprehensive redesign of the completion sub-1https://codalab.lisn.upsaclay.fr/competitions/7170#results till 2022-11-12 00:00 Paciﬁc Time, and our method is termed SCPNet. network. We unveil several key factors to building strong completion networks.
• To cope with the sparsity and incompleteness of the input, we propose to distill the dense relation-based knowledge from the multi-frame model. Note that we are the ﬁrst to apply knowledge distillation to the se-mantic scene completion task.
• To address the long traces of moving objects in com-pletion labels, we present the completion label rectiﬁ-cation strategy.
• Our SCPNet ranks 1st on SemanticKITTI semantic scene completion challenge, outperforming the previ-ous SOTA S3CNet [3] by 7.2 mIoU. Competitive per-formance is also shown in SemanticPOSS completion task and SemanticKITTI semantic segmentation task. 2.