Abstract 1.

Introduction
Despite the success of deep learning in video under-standing tasks, processing every frame in a video is com-putationally expensive and often unnecessary in real-time applications. Frame selection aims to extract the most in-formative and representative frames to help a model better understand video content. Existing frame selection methods either individually sample frames based on per-frame im-portance prediction, without considering interaction among frames, or adopt reinforcement learning agents to find rep-resentative frames in succession, which are costly to train and may lead to potential stability issues. To overcome the limitations of existing methods, we propose a Search-Map-Search learning paradigm which combines the advantages of heuristic search and supervised learning to select the best combination of frames from a video as one entity. By com-bining search with learning, the proposed method can bet-ter capture frame interactions while incurring a low infer-ence overhead. Specifically, we first propose a hierarchical search method conducted on each training video to search for the optimal combination of frames with the lowest er-ror on the downstream task. A feature mapping function is then learned to map the frames of a video to the representa-tion of its target optimal frame combination. During infer-ence, another search is performed on an unseen video to se-lect a combination of frames whose feature representation is close to the projected feature representation. Extensive ex-periments based on several action recognition benchmarks demonstrate that our frame selection method effectively im-proves performance of action recognition models, and sig-nificantly outperforms a number of competitive baselines.
Videos have proliferated online in recent years with the popularity of social media, and have become a major form of content consumption on the Internet. The abundant video data has greatly encouraged the development of deep learn-ing techniques for video content understanding. As one of the most important tasks, action recognition aims to iden-tify relevant actions described in videos, and plays a vital role to other downstream tasks like video retrieval and rec-ommendation.
Due to the high computational cost of processing frames in a video, common practices of action recognition involve sampling a subset of frames or clips uniformly [31] or densely [26, 37] from a given video a serve as the input to a content understanding model. However, since frames in a video may contain redundant information and are not equally important, simple sampling methods are often inca-pable of capturing such knowledge and hence can lead to sub-optimal action recognition results.
Prior studies attempt to actively select relevant video frames to overcome the limitation of straightforward sam-pling, achieving improvements to model performance.
Heuristic methods are proposed to rank and select frames according to the importance score of each frame/clip cal-culated by per-frame prediction [15, 19]. Despite the effec-tiveness, these methods heavily rely on per-frame features, without considering the interaction or diversity among se-lected frames. Reinforcement learning (RL) has also been proposed to identify informative frames by formulating frame selection as a Markov decision process (MDP) [8, 9, 33,35,36]. However, existing RL-based methods may suffer from training stability issues and rely on a massive amount of training samples. Moreover, RL methods make an MDP assumption that frames are selected sequentially depending
on observations of already selected frames, and thus cannot adjust prior selections based on new observations.
In this work, we propose a new learning paradigm named
Search-Map-Search (SMS), which directly searches for the best combination of frames from a video as one entity. SMS formulates the problem of frame selection from the perspec-tive of heuristic search in a large space of video frame com-binations, which is further coupled with a learnable map-ping function to generalize to new videos and achieve effi-cient inference.
Specifically, we propose a hierarchical search algorithm to efficiently find the most favorable frame combinations on training videos, which are then used as explicit supervision information to train a feature mapping function that maps the feature vectors of an input video to the feature vector of the desirable optimal frame combination. During inference on an unseen query video, the learned mapping function projects the query video onto a target feature vector for the desired frame combination, where another search process retrieves the actual frame combination that approximates the target feature vector. By combining search with learn-ing, the proposed SMS method can better capture frame in-teractions while incurring a low inference cost.
The effectiveness of SMS is extensively evaluated on both the long untrimmed action recognition benchmarks, i.e., ActivityNet [2] and FCVID [18], and the short trimmed
UCF101 task [27]. Experimental results show that SMS can significantly improve action recognition models and precisely recognize and produce effective frame selections.
Furthermore, SMS significantly outperforms a range of other existing frame selection methods for the same num-ber of frames selected, while can still generate performance higher than existing methods using only 10% of all labeled video samples for training. 2.