Abstract
Reverse engineering CAD models from raw geometry is a classic but strenuous research problem. Previous learning-based methods rely heavily on labels due to the supervised design patterns or reconstruct CAD shapes that are not easily editable. In this work, we introduce SECAD-Net, an end-to-end neural network aimed at reconstructing compact and easy-to-edit CAD models in a self-supervised manner. Drawing inspiration from the modeling language that is most commonly used in modern CAD software, we propose to learn 2D sketches and 3D extrusion parame-ters from raw shapes, from which a set of extrusion cylin-ders can be generated by extruding each sketch from a 2D plane into a 3D body. By incorporating the Boolean op-eration (i.e., union), these cylinders can be combined to closely approximate the target geometry. We advocate the use of implicit fields for sketch representation, which al-lows for creating CAD variations by interpolating latent codes in the sketch latent space. Extensive experiments on both ABC and Fusion 360 datasets demonstrate the effec-tiveness of our method, and show superiority over state-of-the-art alternatives including the closely related method for supervised CAD reconstruction. We further apply our ap-*Corresponding author: jianwei.guo@nlpr.ia.ac.cn proach to CAD editing and single-view CAD reconstruc-tion. Code will be released at https://github.com/
BunnySoCrazy/SECAD-Net. 1.

Introduction
CAD reconstruction is one of the most sought-after ge-ometric modeling technologies, which plays a substantial role in reverse engineering in case of the original design document is missing or the CAD model of a real object is not available. It empowers users to reproduce CAD mod-els from other representations and supports the designer to create new variations to facilitate various engineering and manufacturing applications.
The advance in 3D scanning technologies has promoted the paradigm shift from time-consuming and laborious manual dimensions to automatic CAD reconstruction. A typical line of works [3,6,35,47] first reconstructs a polygon mesh from the scanned point cloud, then followed by mesh segmentation and primitive extraction to obtain a bound-ary representation (B-rep). Finally, a CAD shape parser is applied to convert the B-rep into a sequence of modeling operations. Recently, inspired by the substantial success of point set learning [1, 32, 49] and deep 3D representa-tions [9, 28, 30], a number of methods have exploited neural
networks to improve the above pipeline, e.g., detecting and fitting primitives to raw point clouds directly [25, 27, 40]. A few works (e.g., CSG-Net [39], UCSG-Net [19], and CSG-Stump [33]) further parse point cloud inputs into a construc-tive solid geometry (CSG) tree by predicting a set of prim-itives that are then combined with Boolean operations. Al-though achieving encouraging compact representation, they only output a set of simple primitives with limited types (e.g., planes, cylinders, spheres), which restricts their rep-resentation capability for reconstructing complex and more general 3D shapes. CAPRI-Net [59] introduces quadric sur-face primitives and the difference operation based on BSP-Net [8] to produce complicated convex and concave shapes via a CSG tree. However, controlling the implicit equation and parameters of quadric primitives is difficult for design-ers to edit the reconstructed models. Thus, the editability of those methods is quite limited.
In this paper, we develop a novel and versatile deep neu-ral framework, named SECAD-Net, to reconstruct high-quality and editable CAD models. Our approach is inspired by the observation that a CAD model is usually designed as a command sequence of operations [7, 38, 50, 51, 57], i.e., a set of planar 2D sketches are first drawn then extruded into 3D solid shapes for Boolean operations to create the final model. At the heart of our approach is to learn the sketch and extrude modeling operations, rather than CSG with parametric primitives. To determine the position and axis of each sketch plane, SECAD-Net first learns multiple extrusion boxes to decompose the entire shape into multiple local regions. Afterward, for the local profile in each box, we utilize a fully connected network to learn the implicit representation of the sketch. An extrusion operator is then designed to calculate the implicit expression of the cylinders according to the predicted sketch and extrusion parameters.
We finally apply a union operation to assemble all extrusion cylinders into the final CAD model.
Benefiting from our representation, our approach is flex-ible and efficient to construct a wide range of 3D shapes.
As the predictions of our method are fully interpretable, it allows users to express their ideas to create variations or im-prove the design by operating on 2D sketches or 3D cylin-ders intuitively. To summarize, our work makes the follow-ing contributions:
• We present a novel deep neural network for reverse en-gineering CAD models with self-supervision, leading to faithful reconstructions that closely approximate the target geometry.
• SECAD-Net is capable of learning implicit sketches and differentiable extrusions from raw 3D shapes with-out the guidance of ground truth sketch labels.
• Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of
SECAD-Net through comprehensive comparisons. We also showcase its immediate applications to CAD in-terpolation, editing, and single-view reconstruction. 2.