Abstract
In this paper, we define a new problem of recovering the 3D geometry of an object confined in a transparent en-closure. We also propose a novel method for solving this challenging problem. Transparent enclosures pose chal-lenges of multiple light reflections and refractions at the interface between different propagation media e.g. air or glass. These multiple reflections and refractions cause seri-ous image distortions which invalidate the single viewpoint assumption. Hence the 3D geometry of such objects can-not be reliably reconstructed using existing methods, such as traditional structure from motion or modern neural re-construction methods. We solve this problem by explicitly modeling the scene as two distinct sub-spaces, inside and outside the transparent enclosure. We use an existing neu-ral reconstruction method (NeuS) that implicitly represents the geometry and appearance of the inner subspace. In or-der to account for complex light interactions, we develop a hybrid rendering strategy that combines volume rendering with ray tracing. We then recover the underlying geome-try and appearance of the model by minimizing the differ-ence between the real and rendered images. We evaluate our method on both synthetic and real data. Experiment results show that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods. Codes and data will be available at https://github.com/hirotong/ReNeuS 1.

Introduction
Digitization of museum collections is an emerging topic of increasing interest, especially with the advancement of virtual reality and Metaverse technology. Many famous mu-seums around the world have been building up their own digital collections 1 2 for online exhibitions. Among these collections, there is a kind of special but important collec-1https://collections.louvre.fr/en/ 2https://www.metmuseum.org/ (a) Reference Image (b) COLMAP [26] (c) NeuS [31] (d) Ours
Figure 1. We propose a new research problem of recovering shape of objects inside a transparent container as shown in (a) and solve it by a physically-based neural reconstruction solution. Other meth-ods (b) and (c) without consideration of the optical effects fail to reconstruct, (d) our proposed ReNeuS can retrieve high-quality mesh of the insect object. tions such as insects [7, 23], human tissues [30], aquatic creatures [6] and other fragile specimens that need to be preserved inside some hard but transparent materials (e.g. resin, glass) as shown in Fig. 1a. In order to digitize such collections, we abstract a distinct research problem which is seeing through the glassy outside and recovering the geom-etry of the object inside. To be specific, the task is to recon-struct the 3D geometry of an object of interest from multiple 2D views of the scene. The object of interest is usually con-tained in a transparent enclosure, typically a cuboid or some regular-shaped container.
A major challenge of this task is the severe image dis-tortion caused by repeated light reflection and refraction at the interface of air and transparent blocks. Since it inval-idates the single viewpoint assumption [9], most existing multi-view 3D reconstruction methods tend to fail.
One of the most relevant research problems is 3D re-construction through refractive interfaces, known as Refrac-tive Structure-from-Motion (RSfM) [1, 4].
In RSfM, one or more parallel interfaces between different propagation media, with different refractive indices, separate the opti-cal system from the scene to be captured. Light passing through the optical system refracts only once at each inter-face causing image distortion. Unlike RSfM methods, we deal with intersecting interfaces where multiple reflections and refractions take place. Another related research topic is reconstruction of transparent objects [13, 17, 19]. In this problem, lights only get refracted twice while entering and exiting the target.
In addition to the multiple refractions considered by these methods, our method also tackles the problem of multiple reflections within the transparent en-closure.
Recently, neural implicit representation methods [21, 22, 28, 29, 31] achieve state-of-the-art performance in the task of novel view synthesis and 3D reconstruction showing promising ability to encode the appearance and geometry.
However, these methods do not consider reflections. Al-though NeRFReN [12] attempts to incorporate the reflec-tion effect, it cannot handle more complicated scenarios with multiple refraction and reflection.
In order to handle such complicated cases and make the problem tractable, we make the following two reasonable simplifications: i. Known geometry and pose of the transparent block.
It is not the focus of this paper to estimate the pose of the interface plane since it is either known [1, 4] or cal-culated as a separate research problem [14] as is typi-cally assumed in RSfM. ii. Homogeneous background and ambient lighting.
Since the appearance of transparent objects is highly affected by the background pattern, several transparent object reconstruction methods [13, 19] obtain ray cor-respondence with a coded background pattern. To con-centrate on recovering the shape of the target object, we further assume monochromatic background with only homogeneous ambient lighting conditions similar to a photography studio.
To handle both Reflection and Refraction in 3D recon-struction, we propose ReNeuS, a novel extension of a neu-In lieu of ral implicit representation method NeuS [31]. dealing with the whole scene together, a divide-and-conquer strategy is employed by explicitly segmenting the scene into internal space, which is the transparent container containing the object, and an external space which is the surrounding air space. For the internal space, we use NeuS [31] to en-code only the geometric and appearance information. For the external space, we assume a homogeneous background with fixed ambient lighting as described in simplification ii.
In particular, we use a novel hybrid rendering strategy that combines ray tracing with volume rendering techniques to process the light interactions across the two sub-spaces. The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We introduce a new research problem of 3D recon-struction of an object confined in a transparent enclo-sure, a rectangular box in this paper.
• We develop a new 3D reconstruction method, called
ReNeuS, that can handle multiple light reflections and refractions at intersecting interfaces. ReNeuS employs a novel hybrid rendering strategy to combine the light intensities from the segmented inner and outer sub-spaces.
• We evaluate our method on both synthetic as well as a newly captured dataset that contains 10 real insect specimens enclosed in a transparent glass container. 2.