Abstract
A central challenge in human pose estimation, as well as in many other machine learning and prediction tasks, is the generalization problem. The learned network does not have the capability to characterize the prediction error, gen-erate feedback information from the test sample, and cor-rect the prediction error on the fly for each individual test sample, which results in degraded performance in general-ization. In this work, we introduce a self-correctable and adaptable inference (SCAI) method to address the general-ization challenge of network prediction and use human pose estimation as an example to demonstrate its effectiveness and performance. We learn a correction network to correct the prediction result conditioned by a fitness feedback er-ror. This feedback error is generated by a learned fitness feedback network which maps the prediction result to the original input domain and compares it against the original input. Interestingly, we find that this self-referential feed-back error is highly correlated with the actual prediction error. This strong correlation suggests that we can use this error as feedback to guide the correction process. It can be also used as a loss function to quickly adapt and opti-mize the correction network during the inference process.
Our extensive experimental results on human pose estima-tion demonstrate that the proposed SCAI method is able to significantly improve the generalization capability and per-formance of human pose estimation. 1.

Introduction
Human pose estimation (HPE) aims to correctly predict and localize human body joints. A variety of downstream applications are based on human pose estimation, such as motion capture [7, 27], activity recognition [1, 6, 37], per-son tracking [36, 41] and video surveillance [18]. Recently, deep learning-based methods for human pose estimation
*Corresponding author. have achieved remarkable success [2,4,12,26,28,30]. How-ever, in complex or unseen scenarios, pose estimation re-mains very challenging due to occlusions, cluttered back-ground, and large variations of appearance and scenes, es-pecially for those distal keypoints at the end locations of body parts, such as wrists and ankles, which have large de-grees of motion freedom and often suffer from severe oc-clusions [13, 39].
We recognize that one major challenge in current human pose estimation, as well as in many other prediction tasks, is generalization. Network models, which have been well learned on the training set, often experience significant per-formance degradation on the test samples which are col-lected from different environments or scenarios. For exam-ple, in human pose estimation, there are different types of occlusions of body parts due to complex scene structures and free-style motions of human bodies. More importantly, the occlusion scenarios of the test samples could be much different from those in the training samples. This often leads to the significant performance degradation of human pose estimation from the training data to the test data. For example, in our experiment, the average prediction accuracy on the training samples is 95.5%. However, on the test set, this accuracy drops to 67%. For those distal keypoints at tip locations of body parts which often experience more signif-icant occlusions, their average performance drop is much more significant, from 95.3% to 57%.
To address this performance degradation or generaliza-tion problem, there are two major questions that need to be carefully answered: (1) how can we tell if the prediction is accurate or not during testing and how to characterize the prediction error? This is difficult because the ground truth values of the test samples are not available during test-ing. Specifically, in pose estimation, we do not have the labeled ground truth locations of the body keypoints. (2)
How to correct the prediction error based on the specific characteristics of the test sample? Current network models, once successfully trained with labeled samples at the train-ing side, remain fixed during testing, performing the feed-forward-only inference process to generate the prediction result. There is no mechanism for us to examine the spe-cific characteristics of the test sample and use them as feed-back to correct the prediction error or adjust the network model. We believe that this unique capability of sample-specific prediction error characterization, error correction, and model optimization is very important for the general-ization performance of learned network models. It also has the potential to significantly improve the prediction accu-racy of test samples.
To address these two challenging issues, in this work, we propose to explore a learning-based feedback-control or correction method for prediction, with applications to hu-man pose prediction. Specifically, let ˆv = Φ(u) be the prediction network which is tasked to predict the true value of v from input u. To answer the first question, we design and learn a fitness feedback network Γ which compares the prediction result ˆv = Φ(u) of the prediction network Φ against the original input u and generate a self-referential feedback error. Very interestingly, in this work, we find that this self-referential feedback error is highly correlated with the prediction error of the network Φ. Note that, when com-puting the self-referential error, we do not need the ground truth data. It can be directly computed on the input sample using the prediction-feedback networks. This allows us to characterize the prediction error of test samples.
Under the guidance of self-referential error feedback, we train a prediction error correction network C to adjust the inference results during the prediction process to improve the prediction accuracy for the test samples. Besides, we find that the self-referential error and the fitness feedback network (FFN) can be used to construct a self-referential loss function on the test samples to quickly adapt and opti-mize the network model during the inference stage, making the model learnable on the test side. We apply the above self-correctable and adaptable inference (SCAI) method to human pose estimation. Our extensive experimental results on benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed SCAI method is able to significantly improve the generalization capability of the underlying prediction algorithm.
It out-performs the existing state-of-the-art methods on human pose estimation by large margins. For example, on the MS
COCO-testdev dataset, our method improves upon the cur-rent best method by up to 1.4%, which is quite significant. 2.