Abstract
Given a 3D object, kinematic motion prediction aims to identify the mobile parts as well as the corresponding mo-tion parameters. Due to the large variations in both topo-logical structure and geometric details of 3D objects, this remains a challenging task and the lack of large scale la-beled data also constrain the performance of deep learning based approaches. In this paper, we tackle the task of object kinematic motion prediction problem in a semi-weakly su-pervised manner. Our key observations are two-fold. First, although 3D dataset with fully annotated motion labels is limited, there are existing datasets and methods for object part semantic segmentation at large scale. Second, seman-tic part segmentation and mobile part segmentation is not always consistent but it is possible to detect the mobile parts from the underlying 3D structure. Towards this end, we pro-pose a graph neural network to learn the map between hier-archical part-level segmentation and mobile parts parame-ters, which are further refined based on geometric align-ment. This network can be first trained on PartNet-Mobility dataset with fully labeled mobility information and then ap-plied on PartNet dataset with fine-grained and hierarchical part-level segmentation. The network predictions yield a large scale of 3D objects with pseudo labeled mobility in-formation and can further be used for weakly-supervised learning with pre-existing segmentation. Our experiments show there are significant performance boosts with the aug-mented data for previous method designed for kinematic motion prediction on 3D partial scans. 1.

Introduction
In this work, we study the problem of 3D object kine-matic motion prediction. As a key aspect of functional analysis of 3D shape, the understanding of part mobili-ties plays an important role in applications, such as robot-*Ruizhen Hu is the corresponding author.
Figure 1. Our semi-weakly supervised method for object kine-matic motion prediction, which utilize the weakly labeled dataset with part semantic segmentation to augment the training data for object kinematic motion prediction on partial scans. environment interaction, object functionality prediction, as well as 3D object reconstruction and animation.
There have been a few methods on discovering part mo-bility from various inputs, including 3D objects and se-quence of RGBD scans, via both supervised or unsuper-vised learning [8, 11, 22, 26, 28]. Despite the rapid develop-ment in this filed, it remains challenging to boost the gener-alization performance of these methods: there is significant performance degeneration when the queried objects present different topology, structure, or geometric details that are out of the space of training examples.
However, it is with great difficulty to collect fully an-notated dataset for kinematic motion prediction, which re-quires not only segmentation of object w.r.t motion but also the associated parameters. Furthermore, it is infeasible to collect such dataset at large scale, since there are only a few dataset with limited size available for motion prediction task such as PartNet-Mobility [24] and Shape2Motion [22].
Meanwhile, as a long lasting task in both graphics and vi-sion, there have been massive methods proposed with large scale dataset of segmented 3D objects. Among them, Part-Net dataset [17] consists of more than 25k 3D models of 24 object categories with the corresponding fine-grained
and hierarchical 3D part information. Given such a dataset that covers sufficient variations in 3D topological structure and geometric details, we wonder if we can bridge the best of two worlds: transfer the fully labeled information from
PartNet-Mobility into PartNet, and leverage the augmented data for motion prediction learning in a semi-weakly super-vised manner, as shown in Figure 1.
Such transfer is non-trivial and the main challenge lies in the fact that existing segmentation of a 3D model does not necessarily comply with its mobilities. For example, for most car models, the door is not a separate component. This fact significantly increases the difficulty of transfer: it is not just adding mobility parameters to the given segmentation but also to find the appropriate mobile parts.
Since both PartNet-Mobility and PartNet provide fine-grained and hierarchical part-level segmentation, we unitize this information and convert the mobile part detection task into a part selection task from the given hierarchy. Specif-ically, we develop a two-stage pipeline in a coarse-to-fine manner. In the first stage, we construct a graph that encodes both the parent-child hierarchy and adjacent part pairs. We then train a graph neural network to predict the motion part at the edge level, including its motion type and correspond-ing parameters. It is trained with PartNet-Mobility data and then applied on PartNet to get the initial prediction. In the second stage, we introduce a refinement process to filter out prediction with low feasibility score and consistency score, refine the motion axis using a heuristic strategy, and gener-ate the final pseudo labels as motion prediction results.
To evaluate the effectiveness of our generated pseudo prediction, we further apply it on the task of motion pre-diction on partial scans. We adapt the ANCSH method pro-posed in [13] and enhance its training with the augmented data. Our experiments show that the prediction accuracy can be improved by a large margin and our approach out-performs state-of-the-art methods under such semi-weakly supervised learning pipeline.
To summarize, our contributions are as follow:
• We are the first to tackle the problem of object kine-matic motion prediction using a semi-weakly super-vised learning framework. Specially, we successfully transfer the fully labeled motion information from a dataset of limited examples to a large set of unlabeled 3D shapes by leveraging the pre-existing segmenta-tion hierarchy information. The augmented data can be used for weakly supervised learning at large scale.
• We propose a robust two-stage pipeline for motion in-formation transfer: A graph neural network is first adapted to train and predict the map between seman-tic segmentation hierarchy and part motion properties.
Then a heuristic strategy is presented to refine and out-put the final predictions.
• We further evaluate our pipeline on the task of 3D par-tial scans motion prediction. Our experiments show that existing approaches trained with the data aug-mented by our method can be improved significantly in terms of prediction accuracy. 2.