Abstract
We propose an approach based on convex relaxations for certifiably optimal robust multiview triangulation. To this end, we extend existing relaxation approaches to non-robust multiview triangulation by incorporating a least squares cost function. We propose two formulations, one based on epipolar constraints and one based on fractional repro-jection constraints. The first is lower dimensional and re-mains tight under moderate noise and outlier levels, while the second is higher dimensional and therefore slower but remains tight even under extreme noise and outlier levels.
We demonstrate through extensive experiments that the pro-posed approaches allow us to compute provably optimal re-constructions even under significant noise and a large per-centage of outliers. 1.

Introduction
Multiview triangulation is the problem of estimating the location of a point in 3D given two or more 2D observa-tions in images taken from cameras with known poses and intrinsics. The 2D observations are typically estimated by some form of feature matching pipeline, so they are always corrupted by noise and outliers. As a result the 3D point cannot be exactly recovered, and instead the solution has to be phrased as a nonconvex optimization problem.
While solutions are typically computed using faster but sub-optimal local optimization methods, there have also been efforts to compute globally optimal triangulations us-ing semidefinite relaxations [1,4,13]. These relaxations can work well even in high-noise scenarios, but their practical use remains limited as they are not robust and even a single outlier can deteriorate the result significantly. In this work, inspired by recent advances in semidefinite relaxations for outlier-robust perception [28], we will show that [1, 4] can be extended to also handle significant amounts of outliers.
Implementation: github.com/linusnie/robust-triangulation-relaxations (a) 22 views, no outliers (b) 22 views, 19 outliers
Figure 1. Example of a triangulated point from the Reichstag dataset. Blue point: ground truth from [12]. Red point: non-robust global optimum found by the relaxation from [1] (see Eq. (T)).
Green point: robust global optimum found by our proposed relax-ation in Eq. (RT).
Semidefinite relaxations have the advantage of being globally solvable in polynomial time, meaning that they can be used to enable practical certifiably optimal algorithms.
After solving the relaxed problem we either have that 1) the relaxation is tight and we provably recover the global opti-mum of the original problem, or 2) the relaxation is prov-ably not tight and we can report failure to find the global optimum. The key metric for the usefulness of a certifiably optimal algorithm is then the percentage of problem cases where the underlying relaxation is tight.
Despite their often slower runtime, certifiably optimal methods offer several advantages: Firstly, in safety-critical systems it may be required or desirable to complement the computed solution with some guarantee that the solver is not stuck in a local optima. Secondly, in many offline appli-cations runtime is actually not as critical and then one may want to trade off better accuracy for extra runtime. Thirdly, globally optimal solutions of real-world problems can serve
as ground truth for assessing the performance of local opti-mization methods.
In this work, we demonstrate a certifiably optimal ap-proach to robust triangulation by developing two convex re-laxations for the truncated least squares cost function. En-abling the combination of robustness with the capacity to compute certifiably optimal solutions. Our main contribu-tions can be summarized as follows:
• We extend the convex triangulation methods from [1] and [4] with a truncated least squares cost function and propose two corresponding convex relaxations.
• We validate empirically that both relaxations remain tight even under large amounts of noise and high out-lier ratios.
• We show that the relaxations are tight in the noise-free and outlier-free case by explicitly constructing the dual solution.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first example of a successful semidefinite relaxation of a robust estimation problem with reprojection errors. 2.