Abstract
Optimal transport (OT) has become exceedingly popu-lar in machine learning, data science, and computer vision.
The core assumption in the OT problem is the equal to-tal amount of mass in source and target measures, which limits its application. Optimal Partial Transport (OPT) is a recently proposed solution to this limitation. Similar to the OT problem, the computation of OPT relies on solving a linear programming problem (often in high dimensions), which can become computationally prohibitive. In this pa-per, we propose an efﬁcient algorithm for calculating the
OPT problem between two non-negative measures in one dimension. Next, following the idea of sliced OT distances, we utilize slicing to deﬁne the Sliced OPT distance. Finally, we demonstrate the computational and accuracy beneﬁts of the Sliced OPT-based method in various numerical exper-iments. In particular, we show an application of our pro-posed Sliced OPT problem in noisy point cloud registration and color adaptation. Our code is available at Github Link. 1.

Introduction
The Optimal Transport (OT) problem studies how to
ﬁnd the most cost-efﬁcient way to transport one probabil-ity measure to another, and it gives rise to popular prob-ability metrics like the Wasserstein distance. OT has at-tracted abundant attention in data science, statistics, ma-chine learning, signal processing, and computer vision
[1, 12, 13, 21, 24, 31, 37, 39, 47, 49]
A core assumption in the OT problem is the equal to-tal amount of mass in the source and target measures (e.g., probability measures). Many practical problems, however, deal with comparing non-negative measures with varying total amounts of mass, e.g., shape analysis [9, 46], do-main adaptation [17], color transfer [10]. In addition, OT distances are often not robust to outliers and noise, as transporting outliers could be prohibitively expensive and might compromise the distance estimation. To address these issues, many variants of the OT problem have been recently proposed, for example, the optimal partial trans-port (OPT) problem [6, 18, 19], the Hellinger–Kantorovich distance [9, 36], unnormalized optimal transport [22], and
Kantorovich–Rubinstein norm [25,35]. These variants were subsequently uniﬁed under the name “unbalanced optimal transport” [11, 36].
The computational complexity of linear programming for balanced and partial OT problems is often a bottleneck for solving large-scale problems. Different approaches have been developed to address this issue. For instance, by en-tropic regularization, the problem becomes strictly convex and can be solved with the celebrated Sinkhorn–Knopp al-gorithm [14,45] which has been extended to the unbalanced setting [10]. This approach can still be computationally ex-pensive for small regularization levels. Other strategies ex-ploit speciﬁc properties of ground costs. For example, if the ground cost is determined by the unique path on a tree, the problem can be efﬁciently solved in the balanced [33, 41] and the unbalanced setting [44]. In particular, balanced 1-dimensional transport problems with convex ground costs can be solved by the northwest corner rule, which essen-tially amounts to sorting the support points of the two input measures.
Based on this, another popular method is the sliced OT approach [5, 30, 43], which assumes the ground cost is consistent with the Euclidean distance (in 1-dimensional space). Furthermore, it has been shown [30, 32, 44] that the
OT distance in Euclidean space can be approximated by the
OT distance in 1-dimensional Euclidean space. Inspired by these works, in this paper, we propose the sliced version of
OPT and an efﬁcient computational algorithm for empiri-cal distributions with uniform weights, i.e., measures of the form (cid:80)n i=1 δxi, where δx is the Dirac measure. Our contri-butions in this paper can be summarized as follows:
∗These authors contributed equally to this work.
• We propose a primal-dual algorithm for 1-dimensional
OPT with a quadratic worst-case time complexity and linear or quadratic complexity in practice. (and identiﬁcation) of an appropriate metric tree remains challenging.
• In d-dimensional space, we propose the Sliced-OPT (SOPT) distance. Similar to the sliced OT distance, we prove that it satisﬁes the metric axioms and propose a computational method based on our 1-dimensional
OPT problem solver.
• We demonstrate an application of SOPT in point cloud registration by proposing a SOPT variant of the iter-ative closest point (ICP) algorithm. Our approach is robust against noise. Also, we apply SOPT to a color adaptation problem (see the supplementary material). 2.