Abstract
LiDAR-based perception is a central component of au-tonomous driving, playing a key role in tasks such as ve-hicle localization and obstacle detection. Since the safety of LiDAR-based perceptual pipelines is critical to safe au-tonomous driving, a number of past efforts have investi-gated its vulnerability under adversarial perturbations of raw point cloud inputs. However, most such efforts have fo-cused on investigating the impact of such perturbations on predictions (integrity), and little has been done to under-stand the impact on latency (availability), a critical con-cern for real-time cyber-physical systems. We present the first systematic investigation of the availability of LiDAR detection pipelines, and SlowLiDAR, an adversarial per-turbation attack that maximizes LiDAR detection runtime.
The attack overcomes the technical challenges posed by the non-differentiable parts of the LiDAR detection pipelines by using differentiable proxies and uses a novel loss function that effectively captures the impact of adversarial perturba-tions on the execution time of the pipeline. Extensive ex-perimental results show that SlowLiDAR can significantly increase the latency of the six most popular LiDAR detec-tion pipelines while maintaining imperceptibility 1. 1.

Introduction
The promise of autonomous transit has stimulated ex-tensive efforts towards the development of self-driving plat-forms [1–3, 5]. A central feature of most such platforms is a LiDAR-based perceptual pipeline (usually integrated with other sensors, such as camera and radar) for critical control tasks, such as localization and object detection [1, 3, 51].
Since errors in localization or obstacle detection can cause the vehicle to crash, these tasks are crucial in ensuring the safety of an autonomous vehicle. As a result, extensive prior research has been devoted to understanding and assur-ing the robustness of the LiDAR-based perceptual pipelines 1Code is available at: https://github.com/WUSTL-CSPL/SlowLiDAR
Figure 1. SlowLiDAR attack. The attack goal is to maximize the runtime latency of the state-of-the-art LiDAR detection models with either an adding-based attack or a perturbation-based attack. against adversarial perturbations on its raw point cloud in-puts [22, 51, 53, 54]. A key focus in prior work has been on perceptual prediction accuracy, for example, the ability of the adversary to hide real obstacles or create phantom obsta-cles [15,32,43,44]. Another significant aspect of the robust-ness analysis of LiDAR-based perception that has received little attention is its real-time performance (availability). In particular, a delay in perceptual processing caused solely by computational quirks of the LiDAR processing pipeline can be just as damaging as a mistaken prediction. For example, a delay in obstacle recognition can cause the vehicle to react to an obstacle too late, failing to avoid a crash.
We present the first systematic analysis of the impact of adversarial point cloud perturbations on the runtime la-tency of common LiDAR perceptual pipelines. To this end, we propose SlowLiDAR, an algorithmic framework for adding adversarial perturbations to point cloud data aim-ing to increase the execution time of LiDAR-based ob-ject detection. Specifically, we consider two attack mech-anisms (see Figure 1): 1) perturbation of the 3D coor-dinates of existing points in the raw point cloud (point perturbation attacks), and 2) adding points to the raw point cloud (point addition attacks). Due to the unique representation and processing procedure of LiDAR detec-tion pipelines, existing availability attacks on other AI pipelines, such as camera-based detection [39], cannot be directly applied. Specifically, there are three new chal-lenges: C1. Non-differentiable aggregation. LiDAR point clouds are generally sparsely distributed in a large 3D space without an organized pattern. To process such un-structured data, the state-of-the-art LiDAR-based detec-tion models extract aggregated features of the points at the level of either 2D or 3D cells [30, 52, 55]. However, the aggregation operation is by nature non-differentiable
[14], which presents new challenges to end-to-end opti-mization. C2. New objective function. Different than ex-isting attacks targeting accuracy, a novel loss function needs to be carefully designed to effectively capture the impact of adversarial perturbations on runtime latency.
C3. Large search space. Because points are distributed in a large space, the perturbation search space is quite large, and conventional gradient-based optimization approaches for crafting attacks may yield poor local optima.
We address these technical challenges as follows. First, in order to enable end-to-end training of adversarial input perturbations, we develop a differentiable proxy to approx-imate the non-differentiable pre-processing pipelines. Sec-ond, we conduct a response time analysis on the detection pipeline to identify the most vulnerable components, and design a novel loss function to best capture the impact of input perturbations on the runtime latency of the identified components. Third, to tackle the large search space, we propose a probing algorithm to identify high-quality initial-ization for gradient-based attack optimization.
We evaluate SlowLiDAR on six popular LiDAR-based detection frameworks that are adopted in modern commer-cial autonomous driving systems. Our experiments show that SlowLiDAR is effective in slowing down the models while retaining comparable imperceptibility. Moreover, the performance of our attacks remains consistent across differ-ent hardware and implementations. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We systematically dissect the LiDAR detection models to analyze the attack surface of their runtime latency to adversarial inputs.
• We propose the first adversarial perturbation attacks against LiDAR detection with the goal of maximizing runtime latency. To this end, we overcome the non-differentiability of the pre-processing pipelines in or-der to perform end-to-end gradient-based attack opti-mization, and design a novel loss function to capture the impact of input perturbations on execution time.
• We evaluate our attacks on six popular LiDAR detec-tion models in modern commercial autonomous driv-ing systems in different hardware and implementations to demonstrate the ability to significantly increase la-tency with comparable imperceptibility. 2.