Abstract
Face super-resolution (FSR) aims to reconstruct high-resolution (HR) face images from the low-resolution (LR) ones. With the advent of deep learning, the FSR technique has achieved significant breakthroughs. However, existing
FSR methods either have a fixed receptive field or fail to maintain facial structure, limiting the FSR performance. To circumvent this problem, Fourier transform is introduced, which can capture global facial structure information and achieve image-size receptive field. Relying on the Fourier transform, we devise a spatial-frequency mutual network (SFMNet) for FSR, which is the first FSR method to ex-plore the correlations between spatial and frequency do-mains as far as we know. To be specific, our SFMNet is a two-branch network equipped with a spatial branch and a frequency branch. Benefiting from the property of Fourier transform, the frequency branch can achieve image-size re-ceptive field and capture global dependency while the spa-tial branch can extract local dependency. Considering that these dependencies are complementary and both favorable for FSR, we further develop a frequency-spatial interac-tion block (FSIB) which mutually amalgamates the com-plementary spatial and frequency information to enhance the capability of the model. Quantitative and qualitative experimental results show that the proposed method out-performs state-of-the-art FSR methods in recovering face images. The implementation and model will be released at https://github.com/wcy-cs/SFMNet. 1.

Introduction
Face super-resolution (FSR), also known as face halluci-nation, is a technology which can transform low-resolution (LR) face images into the corresponding high-resolution (HR) ones. Limited by low-cost cameras and imaging con-ditions, the obtained face images are always low-quality, resulting in a poor visual effect and deteriorating the down-stream tasks, such as face recognition, face attribute analy-*Corresponding author.
Figure 1. Decomposition and reconstruction of face image in the frequency domain. (a) denote face images; (b) are their amplitude spectrum; (c) show their phase spectrum; (d) present the recon-structed images with amplitude information only; (e) are the re-constructed images with phase information only. sis, face editing, etc. Therefore, FSR has become an emerg-ing scientific tool and has gained more of the spotlight in the computer vision and image processing communities [20].
FSR is an ill-posed challenging problem. In contrast to general image super-resolution, FSR only focuses on the face images and is tasked with recovering pivotal facial structures. The first FSR method proposed by Baker and
Kanade [1] sets off the upsurge of traditional FSR methods.
These traditional methods mainly resort to PCA [6], convex optimization [23], Bayesian approach [42] and manifold learning [19] to improve the quality of face images. Nev-ertheless, they are still incompetent in recovering plausible face images due to their limited representation abilities. In recent years, FSR has made a dramatic leap, benefiting from the advent of deep learning [20]. Researchers develop var-ious network frameworks to learn the transformation from
LR face images to the corresponding HR ones, including single-task learning frameworks [5, 8, 17], multi-task learn-ing frameworks [4, 9, 32, 51], etc., which has greatly pushed forward the frontier of FSR research.
Although existing FSR methods improve FSR perfor-mance, they still have limitations to be tackled. Face im-age has global facial structure which plays an important role in transforming LR face images into the correspond-ing HR ones. However, the actual receptive field of the convolutional neural network is limited due to the vanish-ing gradient problem, failing to model global dependency.
To achieve large receptive field, transformer has been ap-plied in computer vision tasks [37, 54]. The self-attention mechanism among every patch can model long-range de-pendency, but it usually has a high demand for both training data and computation resource.
In addition, the partition strategy may also destruct the structure of the facial image.
Therefore, an effective FSR method that can achieve image-size receptive field and maintain the facial structure is an ur-gent demand. To meet this need, frequency information is introduced. It is well-accepted that features (for each pixel or position) in frequency domain can achieve image-size re-ceptive field and naturally have the ascendency of captur-ing global dependency [33], and this can well complement the local facial features extracted in the spatial domain. To obtain frequency information, Fourier transform is adopted to decompose the image into the amplitude component and the phase component, which can well characterize the facial structure information. As shown in Fig. 1, the image recon-structed with the phase component reveals clear facial struc-tural information which is lost in the LR face images. Natu-rally, the phase component of the Fourier transform contains key missing information that is critical for FSR task.
Based on the above analysis, we propose a novel spatial-frequency mutual network (SFMNet) for FSR, which ex-plores the incorporation between spatial and frequency do-mains. The SFMNet is a two-branch network, including a frequency branch and a spatial branch. The frequency branch is tasked with capturing global facial structure by the Fourier transform, while the spatial branch is tailored for extracting local facial features. The global information in frequency domain and the local information in spatial do-main are complementary, and both of them can enhance the representation ability of the model. In light of this, we care-fully design a frequency-spatial interaction block (FSIB) to mutually fuse frequency and spatial information to boost
FSR performance. Based on the SFMNet, we also develop a GAN-based model with a spatial discriminator and a fre-quency discriminator to guide the learning of the model in both spatial and frequency domains, which can further force the SFMNet to produce more high-frequency information.
Overall, the contributions of our work are three-fold: i) We develop a spatial-frequency mutual network for face super-resolution, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first method that explores the potential of both spatial and frequency information for face super-resolution. ii) We carefully design a frequency-spatial interaction block to mutually fuse global frequency information and local spatial information. Thanks to its powerful modeling ability, the complementary information contained in spatial and frequency domains can be fully explored and utilized. iii) We conduct experiments to verify the superiority of the proposed method. Experimental results on two widely used benchmark datasets (i.e, CelebA [30] and Helen [25]) demonstrate that our method achieves the best performance in terms of visual results and quantitative metrics. 2.