Abstract
Modeling and synthesizing real noise in the standard
RGB (sRGB) domain is challenging due to the complicated noise distribution. While most of the deep noise generators proposed to synthesize sRGB real noise using an end-to-end trained model, the lack of explicit noise modeling degrades the quality of their synthesized noise. In this work, we pro-pose to model the real noise as not only dependent on the underlying clean image pixel intensity, but also highly cor-related to its neighboring noise realization within the local region. Correspondingly, we propose a novel noise synthe-sizing framework by explicitly learning its neighboring cor-relation on top of the signal dependency. With the proposed noise model, our framework greatly bridges the distribution gap between synthetic noise and real noise. We show that our generated “real” sRGB noisy images can be used for training supervised deep denoisers, thus to improve their real denoising results with a large margin, comparing to the popular classic denoisers or the deep denoisers that are trained on other sRGB noise generators. The code will be available at https://github.com/xuan611/sRGB-Real-Noise-Synthesizing. 1.

Introduction
Real image denoising is one of the most challeng-ing tasks in low-level vision. Deep denoisers that are trained using synthetic noise, e.g., Additive White Gaus-sian Noise (AWGN), perform poorly on real photography
[3, 15], which motivates more realistic noise models, e.g.,
[1, 5, 14–16]. In general, there are two approaches towards real noise modeling, i.e., modeling in the raw-RGB and standard RGB (sRGB) domains. Popular modeling meth-ods including the physical-based [25, 28] and data-driven methods [1, 6] exploit sophisticated noise models in the raw-RGB domain, which demonstrated promising perfor-*Co-first authors contributed equally.
†Corresponding author: Bihan Wen.
This work was supported in part by the MOE AcRF Tier 1 (RG61/22) and
Start-Up Grant. mance as noise in raw-RGB is largely simplified compar-ing to noise in sRGB [20, 22]. However, raw-RGB images are not usually utilized by common users due to their large sizes. In contrast, most commercial cameras generate sRGB images by default, which are more popular in practice. Un-fortunately, the noise generation methods in the raw-RGB domain cannot be directly applied to sRGB images, as the real noise distribution in sRGB is more complicated than raw-RGB noise, caused by the in-camera signal processing (ISP) pipeline [22].
Recent works [5, 15] proposed to generate noise on raw-RGB images and convert them into sRGB images by the ISP pipeline including demosaicing, white balancing, gamma correction, etc. While these methods synthesized realistic noise, the requirement of raw-RGB images as well as manu-ally defined ISP pipelines limits their applications. An alter-native solution for sRGB real noise modeling is to train the generative models with sRGB noisy-clean images and di-rectly synthesize real noise on sRGB images [16,17,20,26].
However, these models synthesize noise without explicitly modeling the characteristics of sRGB real noise, resulting in degradation of the quality of the synthesized noise.
In this paper, we propose a novel real noise generation network, based on Neighboring Correlation-Aware noise model, dubbed as NeCA, to directly synthesize real noise in the sRGB domain. The proposed real noise synthe-sis assumes that the sRGB real noise is not only signal-dependent, i.e., noise level partially depends on its un-derlying clean pixel, but also highly correlated with its neighboring noise realization. Such a real noise model greatly bridges the gap between the synthetic and real noise in sRGB. Furthermore, the synthesized “real” images by the proposed NeCA can be used for training supervised deep denoisers, thus tackling the real image denoising chal-lenges, subjective to only a few real training data. The trained deep denoiser using our synthetic noisy images achieves state-of-the-art denoising performance, compared to the popular classic denoisers as well as deep denoisers that are trained on synthetic pairs from other noise models.
To sum up, our main contributions can be concluded as fol-lows:
• We introduce a neighboring correlation-aware noise model for sRGB real noise synthesis by explicitly modeling the neighboring correlation of real noise, to bridge the gap between the synthetic and real noise dis-tribution in sRGB.
• Our proposed framework shows a well-generalized ability, which is still capable to improve the real im-age denoising performance even with limited training data.
• With the synthetic image pairs generated by NeCA, the trained denoisers achieve state-of-the-art denoising performance compared with the deep denoisers trained with other real noise models. 2.