Abstract
Optical ﬂow estimation is a fundamental functionality in computer vision. An event-based camera, which asyn-chronously detects sparse intensity changes, is an ideal device for realizing low-latency estimation of the optical
ﬂow owing to its low-latency sensing mechanism. An existing method using local plane ﬁtting of events could utilize the sparsity to realize incremental updates for low-latency estimation; however, its output is merely a normal component of the full optical ﬂow. An alterna-tive approach using a frame-based deep neural network could estimate the full ﬂow; however, its intensive non-incremental dense operation prohibits the low-latency estimation. We propose tangentially elongated Gaussian (TEG) belief propagation (BP) that realizes incremental full-ﬂow estimation. We model the probability of full ﬂow as the joint distribution of TEGs from the normal ﬂow measurements, such that the marginal of this distribution with correct prior equals the full ﬂow. We formulate the marginalization using a message-passing based on the
BP to realize efﬁcient incremental updates using sparse measurements. In addition to the theoretical justiﬁcation, we evaluate the effectiveness of the TEGBP in real-world datasets; it outperforms SOTA incremental quasi-full ﬂow method by a large margin. (The code is available at https://github.com/DensoITLab/tegbp/). 1.

Introduction
Optical ﬂow estimation, which computes the correspon-dence of pixels in different time measurements, is a fun-damental building block of computer vision. One needs to estimate the ﬂow at low latency in many practical appli-cations, such as autonomous driving cars, unmanned aerial vehicles, and factory automation robots. Most of the ex-isting optical ﬂow algorithm utilizes dense video frames; it computes the ﬂow by searching the similar intensity pat-tern [15, 29]. Recently, methods using deep neural net-work (DNN) [29] demonstrate impressive accuracy at the
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
Figure 1. Overview of the proposed TEGBP. We model a belief about the full ﬂow from a normal ﬂow measurement using TEG (RGB ellipse). The mean of the marginal distribution of each TEG with an appropriate prior equals the full ﬂow (magenta arrow). The marginal (magenta ellipse) is computed incrementally using local message passing (RGB arrows) based on BP. cost of higher-computational cost. Either model-based or
DNN-based, the frame-based algorithm needs to compute the entire pixel for every frame, even when there are subtle changes or no changes at all. This dense operation makes it difﬁcult to realize low-latency estimation, especially on the resource-constrained edge device.
The event-based camera is a bio-inspired vision sen-sor, which asynchronously detects intensity change on each pixel. Thanks to the novel sensing mechanism, the camera equips favorable characteristics for optical ﬂow estimation, such as high dynamic range (HDR), blur-free measurement, and, most importantly, sparse low-latency data acquisition.
Many researchers have explored the way to utilize sparsity to realize efﬁcient low-latency estimation; one extends the well-known Lucas-Kanade algorithm [7], and the other ex-ploits the local planer shape of the spatiotemporal event streams [6]. These methods could utilize the sparsity for efﬁcient incremental processing; however, the optical ﬂow computed in this way (e.g., by plane ﬁtting) is the normal
ﬂow, which is a normal component of full ﬂow and often different from them1 we want to obtain. The normal ﬂow is the component of the full ﬂow perpendicular to the edge (i.e., parallel to the intensity gradient). Some work tried to recover the full ﬂow from the normal ﬂow [2]; however, it does not precisely equal the full ﬂow (refer to Sec. 2). There exist methods that could estimate full ﬂow, such as a varia-1full ﬂow is usually simply called optical ﬂow or ﬂow, yet, we use full
ﬂow when we want to highlight the difference with the normal ﬂow.
tional method [5], a multi-scale extension of contrast max-imization [25], or a frame-based DNN [14]. However, they need to apply non-incremental dense operation for all the pixels of the event frame (dense representation constructed from sparse events) for every frame, which prohibits the low-latency estimation on the edge device.
Our research goal is to realize an incremental full ﬂow algorithm from sparse normal ﬂow measurements. To this end, we propose Tangentially Elongated Gaussian (TEG)
Belief Propagation (BP). We compute the full ﬂow using the normal ﬂow measurements, which can be observed di-rectly from an event camera or computed cheaply using an existing algorithm2. Notice that given a single measurement of normal ﬂow, there are inﬁnite possibilities for the full
ﬂow along the tangential direction of the normal ﬂow. We model this uncertainty using the TEG, Gaussian distribu-tion, which has a large variance along the tangential direc-tion of the normal ﬂow. The probability density of full ﬂow on each pixel is given as the marginals of the joint distribu-tion of TEG data factor and some prior factor on a sparse graph (Fig. 1, Sec. 3.3.2). We leverage the sparse graph to formulate the incremental full ﬂow estimation algorithm using message-passing based on BP [9]. We evaluate the ef-fectiveness of the TEGBP on real-world data captured from aerial drones and automobiles. TEGBP outperforms SOTA incremental method [2] by a large margin. 2.