Abstract
This paper proposes a practical method of microscale 3D shape capturing by a teleidoscopic imaging system. The main challenge in microscale 3D shape reconstruction is to capture the target from multiple viewpoints with a large enough depth-of-ﬁeld. Our idea is to employ a teleidoscopic measurement system consisting of three planar mirrors and monocentric lens. The planar mirrors virtually deﬁne mul-tiple viewpoints by multiple reﬂections, and the monocen-tric lens realizes a high magniﬁcation with less blurry and surround view even in closeup imaging. Our contributions include, a structured ray-pixel camera model which han-dles refractive and reﬂective projection rays efﬁciently, an-alytical evaluations of depth of ﬁeld of our teleidoscopic imaging system, and a practical calibration algorithm of the teleidoscopic imaging system. Evaluations with real im-ages prove the concept of our measurement system. 1.

Introduction
Microscale 3D reconstruction has found profound appli-cations in a wide range of domains including medical imag-ing, life science, and aquaculture, due to its non-constrained and non-invasive measurements. The main challenges in image-based microscopic 3D shape measurement is its shal-low depth of ﬁeld and camera arrangement in the closeup scenario. Applying conventional multiple camera system designed for human-size capture [14, 30] cannot be a feasi-ble solution due to limitations on camera placement. Con-ventional multiple mirror system [33] also have difﬁculties inevitably in depth-of-focus due to differences in their opti-cal path lengths with varying numbers of bounces.
In this paper, we show that the fuller 3D shape of a mi-croscale object can be recovered. Our key idea is to employ a catadioptric imaging system which realizes a practical closeup multi-view imaging. The point of our design is that the system has a monocentric front lens like a teleidoscope, instead of using microscopic system in the camera side.
That is, as shown in Fig. 1(a), we introduce a kaleidoscopic multi-facet mirror between the front lens and the camera, where the design realizes a deeper depth-of-ﬁeld and results in less blurring imaging. Unlike conventional microscopic imaging system such as differential phase contrast (DPC) microscopy [4, 34] and multi-focus approaches [15, 24, 26], our method realizes a multi-view capture of the target from a single physical viewpoint which can contribute to free-viewpoint rendering, 3D shape reconstruction, and reﬂec-tion analysis. Our system also has an advantage over ex-isting imaging systems that build multiple views behind the main lens [7, 21] in a closeup environment. The wide FoV with a monocentric main lens and virtual multiple views with mirrors allow closeup and surrounding view capturing in focus.
We call our system teleidoscopic imaging system and show that the system can be compactly modeled by a struc-tured ray-pixel camera model [11], which handles refractive and reﬂective projection rays efﬁciently. Based on our ray-pixel camera model, we derive a practical calibration algo-rithm that estimates the positions of the monocentric lens and multi-facet mirror w.r.t. the camera by using a single reference planar pattern (i.e., a checkerboard). Given the calibration parameters, a scene point can then be linearly triangulated from its teleidoscopic projection in a direct lin-ear transform (DLT) manner [13].
We implement our method with an imaging system consisting of a camera, three planar mirrors, a monocen-tric lens, and a projector placed outside the mirrors for structured-light casting. We quantitatively evaluate the computation cost of numerical projections, the robustness of the calibration, and the depth of ﬁeld of our teleido-scopic imaging system. We also validate the effectiveness of our method qualitatively on a number of real-world mi-croscale objects. These results demonstrate that our method enables holistic and dense reconstruction of microscale ob-jects. We believe our method expands the avenues of three-dimensional analysis of microscale objects and scenes in real world scenarios. 2.