Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a novel learning scheme named weakly semi-supervised instance segmentation (WS-SIS) with point labels for budget-efficient and high-performance instance segmentation. Namely, we consider a dataset setting consisting of a few fully-labeled images and a lot of point-labeled images. Motivated by the main chal-lenge of semi-supervised approaches mainly derives from the trade-off between false-negative and false-positive in-stance proposals, we propose a method for WSSIS that can effectively leverage the budget-friendly point labels as a powerful weak supervision source to resolve the chal-lenge. Furthermore, to deal with the hard case where the amount of fully-labeled data is extremely limited, we pro-pose a MaskRefineNet that refines noise in rough masks.
We conduct extensive experiments on COCO and BDD100K datasets, and the proposed method achieves promising re-sults comparable to those of the fully-supervised model, even with 50% of the fully labeled COCO data (38.8% vs. 39.7%). Moreover, when using as little as 5% of fully la-beled COCO data, our method shows significantly supe-rior performance over the state-of-the-art semi-supervised learning method (33.7% vs. 24.9%). The code is available at https://github.com/clovaai/PointWSSIS. 1.

Introduction
Recently proposed instance segmentation methods [5, 8, 9, 13, 15, 16, 23, 32, 42, 45] have achieved remark-able performance owing to the availability of abundant of segmentation labels for training. However, compared to other label types (e.g., bounding box or point), seg-mentation labels necessitate delicate pixel-level annota-tions, demanding much more monetary cost and human ef-fort. Consequently, weakly-supervised instance segmen-tation (WSIS) and semi-supervised instance segmentation (SSIS) approaches have gained attention to reduce anno-Figure 1. Proposals and instance masks. The absence of a pro-posal leads to the missing mask, even though the mask could be generated if given the correct proposal (zebra). Also, noise pro-posal often leads to noisy masks. Our motivation stems from the bottleneck in the proposal branch, and this paper shows economic point labels can be leveraged to resolve it. tation costs. WSIS approaches alternatively utilize inex-pensive weak labels such as image-level labels [1, 26, 52], point labels [11, 26, 27] or bounding box labels [19, 31, 43].
Besides, SSIS approaches [47, 51] employ a small amount of pixel-level (fully) labeled data and a massive amount of unlabeled data. Although they have shown potential in budget-efficient instance segmentation, there still exists a large performance gap between theirs and the results of fully-supervised learning methods.
Specifically, SSIS approaches often adopt the following training pipeline: (1) train a base network with fully la-beled data, (2) generate pseudo instance masks for unla-beled images using the base network, and (3) train a target network using both full and pseudo labels. The major chal-lenge of SSIS approaches comes from the trade-off between the number of missing (i.e., false-negative) and noise (i.e., false-positive) samples in the pseudo labels. Namely, some strategies for reducing false-negatives, which is equivalent to increasing true-positives, often end up increasing false-positives accordingly; an abundance of false-negatives or false-positives in pseudo labels impedes stable convergence of the target network. However, optimally reducing false-negatives/positives while increasing true-positives is quite challenging and remains a significant challenge for SSIS.
To address this challenge, we first revisit the funda-mental behavior of the instance segmentation framework.
Most existing instance segmentation methods adopt a two-step inference process as shown in Figure 1: (1) generate instance proposals where an instance is represented as a box [9, 16, 21, 32] or point [42, 44–46] in proposal branch, and (2) produce instance masks for each instance proposal in mask branch. As shown in Figure 1, if the network fails to obtain an instance proposal (i.e., false-negative proposal), it cannot produce the corresponding instance mask. Although the network could represent the instance mask in the mask branch, the absence of the proposal becomes the bottleneck for producing the instance mask. From the behavior of the network, we suppose that addressing the bottleneck in the proposals is a shortcut to the success of the SSIS.
Motivated by the above observations, we rethink the po-tential of using point labels as weak supervision. The point label contains only a one-pixel categorical instance cue but is budget-friendly as it is as easy as providing image-level labels by human annotators [3]. We note that the point la-bel can be leveraged as an effective source to (i) resolve the performance bottleneck of the instance segmentation net-work and (ii) optimally balance the trade-off between false-negative and false-positive proposals. Thus, we formulate a new practical training scheme, Weakly Semi-Supervised
Instance Segmentation (WSSIS) with point labels.
In the WSSIS task, we utilize a small amount of fully labeled data and a massive amount of point labeled data for budget-efficient and high-performance instance segmentation.
Under the WSSIS setting, we filter out the proposals to keep only true-positive proposals using the point labels.
Then, given the true-positive proposals, we exploit the mask representation of the network learned by fully labeled data to produce high-quality pseudo instance masks. For prop-erly leveraging point labels, we consider the characteristics of the feature pyramid network (FPN) [34], which consists of multi-level feature maps for multi-scale instance recog-nition. Each pyramid level is trained to recognize instances of particular sizes, and extracting instance masks from un-fit levels often causes inaccurate predictions, as shown in
Figure 4. However, since point labels do not have instance size information, we handle this using an effective strat-egy named Adaptive Pyramid-Level Selection. We estimate which level is the best fit based on the reliability of the net-work (i.e., confidence score) and then adaptively produce an instance mask at the selected level.
Meanwhile, on an extremely limited amount of fully la-beled data, the network often fails to sufficiently represent the instance mask in the mask branch, resulting in rough and noisy mask outputs. In other words, the true-positive proposal does not always lead to a true-positive instance mask in this case. To cope with this limitation, we pro-pose a MaskRefineNet to refine the rough instance mask.
The MaskRefineNet takes three input sources, i.e., image, rough mask, and point; the image provides visual informa-tion about the target instance, the rough mask is used as the prior knowledge to be refined, and the point information ex-plicitly guides the target instance. Using the richer instruc-tive input sources, MaskRefineNet can be stably trained even with a limited amount of fully labeled data.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, we conduct extensive experiments on the COCO [35] and
BDD100K [49] datasets. When training with half of the fully labeled images and the rest of the point labeled im-ages on the COCO dataset (i.e., 50% COCO), we achieve a competitive performance with the fully-supervised perfor-mance (38.8% vs. 39.7%). In addition, when using a small amount of fully labeled data, e.g., 5% of COCO data, the proposed method shows much superior performance than the state-of-the-art SSIS method [47] (33.7% vs. 24.9%).
In summary, the contributions of our paper are
• We show that point labels can be leveraged as effec-tive weak supervisions for budget-efficient and high-performance instance segmentation. Further, based on this observation, we establish a new training protocol named Weakly Semi-Supervised Instance Segmenta-tion (WSSIS) with point labels.
• To further boost the quality of the pseudo instance masks when the amount of fully labeled data is extremely limited, we propose the MaskRefineNet, which refines noisy parts of the rough instance masks.
• Extensive experimental results show that the proposed method can achieve competitive performance to those of the fully-supervised models while significantly out-performing the semi-supervised methods. 2.