Abstract
In this paper we introduce a rule-based, compositional, and hierarchical modeling of action using Therbligs as our
Introducing these atoms provides us with a con-atoms. sistent, expressive, contact-centered representation of ac-tion. Over the atoms we introduce a differentiable method of rule-based reasoning to regularize for logical consistency.
Our approach is complementary to other approaches in that the Therblig-based representations produced by our archi-tecture augment rather than replace existing architectures’ representations. We release the first Therblig-centered an-notations over two popular video datasets - EPIC Kitchens 100 and 50-Salads. We also broadly demonstrate bene-fits to adopting Therblig representations through evalua-tion on the following tasks: action segmentation, action anticipation, and action recognition - observing an aver-age 10.5%/7.53%/6.5% relative improvement, respectively, over EPIC Kitchens and an average 8.9%/6.63%/4.8% rel-ative improvement, respectively, over 50 Salads. Code and data will be made publicly available. 1.

Introduction
We propose the use of Therbligs - a low-level mutu-ally exclusive contact demarcated set of sub-actions. These
Therbligs are consistent in that a given action segment has only a single Therblig representation, and Therbligs are ex-pressive in that they capture the meaningful physical as-pects of action relevant to action modeling. Therbligs were introduced in the early 20th century as a set of 18 elemental motions used to analyze complex movement - see the Sup-plementary Materials for a brief historical background. We adopt 7 Therbligs pertaining to those involving the manipu-lation of objects. See Figure 1 for our Therblig set.
The benefits of our Therblig-centered framework in-clude: compositionality & hierarchy; rule-based reasoning; resolution of semantic ambiguity; contact-centered preci-sion of temporal boundaries of action.
Contact transitions demarcate Therblig boundaries, giv-ing Therbligs a consistency which methods relying on anno-tators’ intuited demarcations lack 1. Between points of con-tact exist contact states represented by a binary class (con-tact, no contact) for each object present, which are wholly captured by Therbligs. As objects in contact are the pri-mary objects of interaction and define the space of possible actions, they provide meaningful information for the mod-eling of action.
Therblig atoms are then composable into higher entities, including full actions. These actions are in turn compos-able into sequences constituting activities. We then have the hierarchy of representation illustrated in Figure 2. At the lowest, and instantaneous, level are points of contact, 1See [1] for a case study on how annotators have difficulties coming to a consensus on when actions begin and end.
Figure 1. Listed above are the Therbligs we select, their symbolic illustrations as introduced by Gilbreths, and brief descriptions of their usage.
Figure 2. We introduce the use of Therbligs (ti) in video understanding as a consistent, expressive, symbolic representation of sub-action.
Points of Contact (indicated by the divider dashes) are necessarily associated with Therbligs and/or their boundaries. Because of the unambiguity of Points of Contact, Therblig boundaries gain precision and are non-overlapping. On top of Therblig atoms we construct a framework for Rule Enforcement, enforcing greater logical consistency through commonsense rules. This rule-based framework allows for the easy introduction of long-term constraints. Therblig atoms are then composable into actions (ai), which are in turn composable into activities. between which exist Therbligs with temporal extension, on top of which exist action, permutations of which constitute longer activities.
Architectures built upon Therbligs for the modeling of action gain temporal precision through points of contact as well as meaningful information captured by contact states.
Therbligs also exhibit semantic mutual exclusivity in that there is one and only one Therblig interpretation of a se-quence, as opposed to the many interpretations when action labels are intuited 2, leading to semantic ambiguity. As a consequence of Therbligs, semantic ambiguity at the action-level is constrained by the deeper grounding of action labels in explicit action dynamics (see Figure 2).
Unlike higher level actions, Therbligs enable the im-posing of a contact-based logic defining preconditions and postconditions in the form of states of contact before and after Therbligs. For example, an object being moved must be preceded by grasp and proceeded by a release. The rules of this logic interface at the Therblig level of the hierarchy.
These rules allow for biasing towards consistency between contact states and Therblig predictions within a loss term (see Section 3.2.2), and provide constraints over possible action sequences (see Section 3.2.1).
In producing sub-action level symbolic representations, our proposed hierarchical architecture is comprised of two main components; the Therblig-Model, which maps video to Therbligs; and, the Action-Model, which maps video and Therbligs to actions. The Therblig-Model is optimized over a loss including structure-aware terms for contact con-sistency and Therblig consistency by incorporating differ-entiable reasoning. Figure 3 illustrates our architecture. 2Some additional structure is needed for complete mutual exclusivity -see the Supplementary Materials for discussion on this structure.
This architecture is complementary to, rather than in com-petition with, existing architectures for action modeling -Therblig representations can be easily integrated through concatenation with existing feature representations. We demonstrate this with two state-of-the-art approaches to ac-tion segmentation - MSTCN++ [15] and ASFormer [22] and four popular approaches to action recognition - I3D [5],
ViViT [2], TimeSFormer [3], and MoViNet [13].
We evaluate our approach over the tasks of action segmentation, action recognition, and action anticipation.
We evaluate over the EPIC Kitchens 100 and 50-Salads datasets.
The primary contributions of our work are as follows:
• Therbligs, a consistent, expressive symbolic represen-tation of sub-action centered on contact.
• Rules: Flexible and differentiable constraining of in-tuitive constraints on arrangement of atomic actions, informed by commonsense rules.
• Novel hierarchical a architecture
Therblig-Model and Action-Model. Representations produced by the Therblig-Model can be easily inte-grated into other approaches, as we demonstrate with six popular action understanding approaches. composed of
• Dataset: We release the first Therblig-centered annota-tions over two popular video datasets.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 discusses related works, Section 3 introduces our proposed method, Section 4 describes the experiments, in Section 5 we provide discussion and in Section 6 we conclude.
Figure 3. Architectural diagram of our framework. Therblig-Model takes a stack of K = 100 frames as input, feeding them to various backbone video architectures followed by a 2-layer GRU (Backbone + LSTM), which in turn produces hidden states ht i, passing through all T /100 stacks of the video. Hidden states ht i are fed to fully connected layers, followed by a Gumbel-Softmax operation, producing
Therblig predictions amenable to differentiable reasoning. Action-Model takes a sliding window with window size W over the original video sequence with stride s, both values depending on the choice of architecture. These windows are fed to ϕ, an attention mechanism consisting of a 2 layer MLP - this MLP attends over the hidden states produced by Therblig-Model. The blended features produced by ϕ are fed together with the video window to a (Video Network) predicting action class likelihood a. See Sections 3.1.1 and 3.1.2 for details. 2.