Abstract
Robust and non-destructive material classification is a challenging but crucial first-step in numerous vision appli-cations. We propose a physics-guided material classifica-tion framework that relies on thermal properties of the ob-ject. Our key observation is that the rate of heating and cooling of an object depends on the unique intrinsic proper-ties of the material, namely the emissivity and diffusivity. We leverage this observation by gently heating the objects in the scene with a low-power laser for a fixed duration and then turning it off, while a thermal camera captures measure-ments during the heating and cooling process. We then take this spatial and temporal “thermal spread function” (TSF) to solve an inverse heat equation using the finite-differences approach, resulting in a spatially varying estimate of dif-fusivity and emissivity. These tuples are then used to train a classifier that produces a fine-grained material label at each spatial pixel. Our approach is extremely simple re-quiring only a small light source (low power laser) and a thermal camera, and produces robust classification results with 86% accuracy over 16 classes1. 1.

Introduction
Material classification is an important task pertinent to a diverse set of fields including but not limited to medicine and biology [1], chip manufacturing, recycling [2, 3], land and weather monitoring using satellites, and vision and robotics. Robust material classification is particularly crit-ical in separating various parts of an object based on their constituent materials [2,3]. Common tools for material clas-sification span a large spectrum including simple tools such as infrared spectroscopy, hyperspectral imaging to more ex-otic tools such as ultrasound, and x-ray fluorescent imagers.
Material classification primarily relies on various dimen-sions of light including bidirectional reflectance function 1Code: https://github.com/aniketdashpute/TSF
Figure 1. Material classification with thermal properties. Ma-terials have unique thermodynamics that enables robust classifica-tion. We propose a simple setup composed of (a) a 60mW laser as a heat source and a thermal camera to capture the heat profile (in-set). This results in a (b) stack of images we call Thermal Spread
Function (TSF) that encodes heating and cooling effect around the laser dot. The TSF data is used to (c) estimate diffusivity map and (d) the external heat source term using inverse Finite Difference
Method, which is then used to (e) classify the material robustly. (BRDF) slices [4], color and NIR images [5], frequency and depth-dependent ToF distortion [6], spectral imaging methods [7,8], multi-modal methods [9], and thermal imag-ing [10]. Methods based on RGB images are popular due to availability of RGB cameras and large labled datasets, but suffer from lack of robustness. In contrast, spectrum-based imaging based methods enable accurate classification but often require complex optical systems such as hyper-spectral cameras, and are sensitive to external illumination conditions.
Human perception of materials is often multi-modal, such as relying on touch and vision to accurately classify material. This act of touching further involves a thermody-namic exchange that relies on the material composition of
the object. A metallic object results in rapid conduction of heat whereas non-metallic objects like ones made of wood result in slower transfer rate. Thus the intrinsic thermal properties provides an insight into the material properties that is often missed or confused by vision alone. Previous work in contact ways of knowing conductivity - haptic sens-ing [11, 12], and haptic displays [13, 14] leveraged this idea by developing “an artificial fingertip”. The drawback of this method is that it is invasive - it requires to touch the scene and thus can lead to interfering with it. Thermal characteri-zation for recycling has also been done using a spectrometer and a fluxmeter [15].
Thermal Imaging methods enable contact-free estima-tion of thermal properties, thus allowing us to classify ma-terials rapidly and in a non-destructive manner. One of the most popular contact-less methods for determining thermal diffusivity is the laser flash method. A laser is flashed on a thin slice (microns thick) of a material and the temper-ature change is observed from the other side, providing a quantitative estimate of the thermal diffusivity or conduc-tivity [16, 17]. This is restrictive due to the constrained lab setup and requirement of thin slices. Thermal imaging has also been used for non-destructive infrastructure inspection where the difference in thermal behaviour of unaltered and defected zones allow defect detection [18].
We take inspiration from the contact-less methods and develop a non-invasive thermal imaging system for material classification. As opposed to previous methods, our method is robust enough to be used in uncontrolled environments, and not limited to constrained lab setups. We use a visible laser beam as an external heat source that shines on a mate-rial, which absorbs a fraction of this beam corresponding to optical wavelength . The absorption of this energy leads to a rise in temperature that shows up in the long wave infrared domain (LWIR) and is captured by the thermal camera. The thermal camera is used to capture the heating process, and once the heat source is off, its cooling (refer Fig. 1). We define the temperature transients obtained from the heating-cooling as its Thermal Spread Function (TSF) and use it for robustly classifying materials.
A key challenge with using TSF for classifying materials is that a thermal camera requires a known emissivity (ε) (ra-tio of radiated energy of the object to that of a black-body) for accurately estimating the temperature. To overcome this ambiguity, we leverage a physically accurate heat diffusion equation (see Sec. 2) that carefully models the thermody-namic interactions between the ambient scene and the ob-ject. This estimated TSF is then used for training a material classifier which enables robust material classification.
Our approach and main contributions
When objects are heated through radiation on surface and allowed to cool down, they display characteristic tem-Figure 2. Heating and capturing process. We use an external heat source to heat the object and a thermal camera to observe the heating and cooling effect. Refer Sec. 2 for detailed explanation. perature changes. These changes are based on their initial temperature, surface absorption, and heat diffusivity. We inject heat through a small portion on the surface of a ma-terial which diffuses throughout the body over time. If we observe a small patch of material in the vicinity of injection, we observe the diffusion - both during the injection phase and during the cooling phase after no external heat is sup-plied. We call this varying 2D temperature profile as the
Thermal Spread Function (TSF) of the material.
We measure the TSF of the material through a Long
Wave Infrared (LWIR) thermal camera. We derive diffu-sivity and an absorption factor from the TSF to characterize the material as these properties are independent of the ini-tial temperature of the object. Our main contributions are the following.
• We first derive a physically accurate model that character-izes the Thermal Spread Functions (TSFs) as a function of initial temperature of the object and an object’s ther-modynamic properties.
• We then use a Finite Differences (FD) Method to solve the inverse heat problem for recovering parameters related to diffusion, absorption and emission
• Finally, we design and demonstrate a simple optical setup for non-invasively recovering the thermodynamic proper-ties and using them to classify materials. 2.