Abstract
Image aesthetics assessment (IAA) is a challenging task due to its highly subjective nature. Most of the current stud-ies rely on large-scale datasets (e.g., AVA and AADB) to learn a general model for all kinds of photography images.
However, little light has been shed on measuring the aes-thetic quality of artistic images, and the existing datasets only contain relatively few artworks. Such a defect is a great obstacle to the aesthetic assessment of artistic images. To fill the gap in the field of artistic image aesthetics assess-ment (AIAA), we first introduce a large-scale AIAA dataset:
Boldbrush Artistic Image Dataset (BAID), which consists of 60,337 artistic images covering various art forms, with more than 360,000 votes from online users. We then pro-pose a new method, SAAN (Style-specific Art Assessment
Network), which can effectively extract and utilize style-specific and generic aesthetic information to evaluate artis-tic images. Experiments demonstrate that our proposed approach outperforms existing IAA methods on the pro-posed BAID dataset according to quantitative comparisons.
We believe the proposed dataset and method can serve as a foundation for future AIAA works and inspire more re-search in this field. Dataset and code are available at: https://github.com/Dreemurr-T/BAID.git 1.

Introduction
With the ever-growing scale of online visual data, image aesthetic assessment (IAA) shows great potential in a vari-ety of applications such as photo recommendation, image ranking and image search [6]. In recent years, image style transfer [9, 14, 19, 20, 26] and AI painting [15, 39] have be-come high-profile research areas. Users can easily generate artworks of numerous styles from websites and online ap-plications, which has led to the explosion of artistic images online and the drastic increase in demand for automatically evaluating artwork aesthetics. We refer to this problem as
*Corresponding author.
Figure 1. Samples from the proposed BAID dataset. BAID covers a wide range of artistic styles and painting themes. artistic image aesthetic assessment (AIAA).
The artistic image aesthetic assessment task is similar to IAA for being extremely challenging due to its highly subjective nature, as different individuals may have distinct visual and art preferences. Existing datasets related to this task can be summarized into three categories, but none of them meets the requirements of the AIAA task: (1) IAA datasets: modern IAA methods [13, 21, 23, 30, 32, 34] are data-driven, usually trained and evaluated on large-scale
IAA datasets, e.g., AVA [25], AADB [17] and CUHK-PQ [22]. However, these datasets only contain real-world
photos and do not include artistic images like oil paintings or pencil sketches. This deficiency of artistic images is prevalent in existing IAA datasets [4, 16, 17, 22, 28], which means that given an artwork, existing IAA methods evalu-ate it based on perceptions learned from photography, and the evaluation is likely to be inaccurate since the perceptual rules of photography and art are not the same. (2) Artis-tic datasets without aesthetic labels: existing large-scale artistic image datasets [1, 29, 36] are mainly used to train style transfer, artistic style classification or text to image models, but they lack score annotations indicating image aesthetic level. (3) Small-scale AIAA datasets: efforts into building public AIAA datasets are scarce and the existing datasets [3,8] contain relatively few number of images (less than 2,000). Based on the above observations, we conclude that the lack of a large-scale AIAA dataset is the biggest obstacle towards developing AIAA approaches.
To solve the problem, we first introduce a large-scale dataset specifically constructed for the AIAA task: the
Boldbrush Artistic Image Dataset (BAID), which consists of 60,337 artworks annotated with more than 360,000 votes.
The proposed BAID is, to our knowledge, the largest AIAA dataset, which far exceeds existing IAA and AIAA datasets in the quantity and quality of artworks.
Furthermore, we propose a baseline model, called the
Style-specific Art Assessment Network (SAAN), which can effectively exploit the style features and the generic aes-thetic features of the given artwork. Our model consists of three modules: 1) Generic Aesthetic Feature Extrac-tion Branch: inspired by the studies [27, 31], we adopt a self-supervised learning scheme to train a Generic Aes-thetic Branch to extract aesthetics-aware features. The self-supervised scheme is based on the correlation between the aesthetic quality of the images and degradation editing op-erations. This essentially provides data augmentation such that the model can better learn the quality of different art-works. 2) Style-specific Aesthetic Feature Extraction
Branch: observing that the style of the artwork is critical when assessing its aesthetic value and different styles need to extract different style-related aesthetic features, we pro-pose a Style-specific Aesthetic Branch to incorporate style information into aesthetic features and extract style-specific aesthetic features via adaptive instance normalization [14]. 3) Spatial Information Fusion: we also add a non-local block [35] into the proposed method to fuse spatial infor-mation into the extracted aesthetic features.
The main contributions of our work are three-fold:
• We address the problem of artistic image aesthetics assessment, and introduce a new large-scale dataset
BAID consisting of 60,337 artworks annotated with more than 360,000 votes to facilitate research in this direction.
• We propose a style-specific artistic image assessment
Table 1. Summary of IAA/AIAA datasets and our proposed BAID dataset. BAID provides a significantly larger number of artistic images and has user subjective votes.
Dataset
Number of images Number of artistic images
DP Challenge [4]
Photo.Net [16]
CUHK-PQ [22]
AVA [25]
AADB [17]
FLICKR-AES [28]
PARA [37]
TAD66K [12]
JenAesthetic [3]
VAPS [8]
BAID (Ours) 16,509 20,278 17,673 255,530 10,000 40,000 31,220 66,327 1,628 999 60,337 – – – – – – – 1,200 1,628 999 60,337 network called SAAN, which combines style-specific and generic aesthetic features to evaluate artworks.
• We evaluate the state-of-the-art IAA approaches and our proposed method on the proposed BAID dataset.
Our model achieves promising results on all the met-rics, which clearly demonstrates the validity of our model. 2.