Abstract
In many computer vision applications (e.g., robotics and autonomous driving), high dynamic range (HDR) data is necessary for object detection algorithms to handle a vari-ety of lighting conditions, such as strong glare. In this pa-per, we aim to achieve object detection on RAW sensor data, which naturally saves the HDR information from image sen-sors without extra equipment costs. We build a novel RAW sensor dataset, named ROD, for Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)-based object detection algorithms to be applied to
HDR data. The ROD dataset contains a large amount of an-notated instances of day and night driving scenes in 24-bit dynamic range. Based on the dataset, we ﬁrst investigate the impact of dynamic range for DNNs-based detectors and demonstrate the importance of dynamic range adjustment for detection on RAW sensor data. Then, we propose a sim-ple and effective adjustment method for object detection on
HDR RAW sensor data, which is image adaptive and jointly optimized with the downstream detector in an end-to-end scheme. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the per-formance of detection on RAW sensor data is signiﬁcantly superior to standard dynamic range (SDR) data in different situations. Moreover, we analyze the inﬂuence of texture in-formation and pixel distribution of input data on the perfor-mance of the DNNs-based detector. Code and dataset will be available at https://gitee.com//mindspore/ models/tree/master/research/cv/RAOD. 1.

Introduction
Real-world scenes are complex and of high dynamic range (HDR), especially in extreme situations like the direct light of other vehicles. In many computer vision applica-tions, such as autonomous driving and robotics, HDR data is important and necessary for making safety-critical deci-sions [34] since it extends the captured luminance. For in-stance, images may easily get over-exposed in brighter areas
*Equal contribution. †Corresponding author. This work was done when
Ruikang Xu was a research intern at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab. on standard dynamic range (SDR) images, but there may be important information in corresponding raw regions. To ob-tain the HDR data, recent works use additional cameras and even unconventional sensors, such as neuromorphic cam-eras and infrared cameras [13, 25], which inevitably brings extra costs. In this paper, we make the ﬁrst effort to achieve object detection on RAW sensor data, which naturally stores
HDR information without any additional burden.
RAW sensor data is generated from the image sensor, and is the input data of the image signal processor (ISP), rendering SDR images suitable for human perception and understanding. RAW sensor data is naturally HDR and save all information from image sensors. However, datasets from the RAW domain are difﬁcult to collect, store and annotate.
And, to the best of our knowledge, there is no large-scale
HDR RAW sensor dataset available for object detection.
Existing RAW sensor datasets are no more than 14-bit and not large enough for practical applications. For instance,
PASCALRAW dataset [27] is of only 12-bit, which is not wide enough to handle complex lighting conditions. To ﬁll this gap, we create a novel RAW sensor dataset for object detection on the driving scene, named as ROD, which con-sists of 25k annotated RAW sensor data in a 24-bit dynamic range on day and night scenarios.
On the other hand, most Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)-based object detection algorithms are designed for the com-mon SDR data, which only records information in the 8-bit dynamic range. Hence, we ﬁrst investigate the impact of dy-namic range for DNNs-based detection algorithms and ex-perimentally ﬁnd that directly applying these DNNs-based detectors on HDR RAW sensor data results in signiﬁcant performance degradation, and it gets worse when the dy-namic range increases. Then, we analyze the key compo-nent of the ISP system and demonstrate the importance of dynamic range adjustment for RAW detection.
In this paper, we propose an adjustment method for the effective detection on RAW sensor data, which is jointly op-timized with the downstream detection network in an end-to-end scheme. Note that our proposed method is trained together with the detector from scratch only using object an-notations as the supervision. To effectively exploit the HDR information from RAW sensor data, we devise an image-adaptive processing network to regulate RAW sensor data with learnable transformation functions. Speciﬁcally, we design two modules to adjust the dynamic range of RAW sensor data by image-level and pixel-level information. In addition, our proposed method is lightweight and computa-tionally efﬁcient.
Extensive experimental results on the proposed ROD dataset demonstrate that the performance of object detec-tion on RAW sensor data is signiﬁcantly superior to de-tection on SDR data in different scenarios. Our method also outperforms recent state-of-the-art neural ISP meth-ods [23, 41]. Comprehensive ablation experiments show that our proposed method effectively improves the perfor-mance of DNNs-based object detection algorithms on HDR
RAW sensor data. Furthermore, we analyze the inﬂuence of texture information and pixel distribution of the input data for the performance of the downstream detection network.
In summary, the main contributions are as follows:
• We build a novel RAW sensor dataset for object detec-tion on HDR RAW sensor data, which contains 25k driving scenes on both day and night scenarios.
• We propose a simple and effective adjustment method for detection on HDR RAW sensor data, which is jointly optimized with the detector in an end-to-end manner.
• Extensive experiments demonstrate that object detec-tion on HDR RAW sensor data signiﬁcantly outperforms that on SDR data in different situations. It also shows that our method is effective and computationally efﬁcient. 2.