Abstract
Tracking objects over long videos effectively means solv-ing a spectrum of problems, from short-term association for un-occluded objects to long-term association for objects that are occluded and then reappear in the scene. Meth-ods tackling these two tasks are often disjoint and crafted for specific scenarios, and top-performing approaches are often a mix of techniques, which yields engineering-heavy solutions that lack generality. In this work, we question the need for hybrid approaches and introduce SUSHI, a uni-fied and scalable multi-object tracker. Our approach pro-cesses long clips by splitting them into a hierarchy of sub-clips, which enables high scalability. We leverage graph neural networks to process all levels of the hierarchy, which makes our model unified across temporal scales and highly general. As a result, we obtain significant improvements over state-of-the-art on four diverse datasets. Our code and models are available at bit.ly/sushi-mot. 1.

Introduction
Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) aims to identify the tra-jectories of all moving objects from a video.
It is an es-sential task for many applications such as autonomous driv-ing, robotics, and video analysis. Tracking-by-detection is a commonly used paradigm that divides the problem into (i) detecting objects at every frame and (ii) performing data association, i.e., linking objects into trajectories.
In the presence of highly accurate object detections, data association happens mostly among detections that are close
* Equal contribution.
† Currently at NVIDIA. in time, i.e., short-term association. Simple cues such as position and motion-based proximity [2, 3, 45, 65, 67] or lo-cal appearance [30, 49, 52, 66] are often enough for accu-rate association. Different challenges appear in crowded scenes, when objects may be often occluded and not de-tected for several frames. This forces methods to perform association among detections in distant time frames, i.e., long-term association. This requires specific solutions that build more robust global appearance models [32, 35, 44], create motion models capable of long-term trajectory pre-diction [11, 21, 37] or bring robustness by performing asso-ciation across all frames and all trajectories using a graph representation [4, 8, 14, 43, 44].
Due to the different nature of these tasks, solutions used for short-term associations tend to fail in long-term scenar-ios. In fact, most state-of-the-art trackers use a combination of approaches to track over different timespans and there-fore can be considered to be multi-level trackers. Several short-term trackers use independent re-identification (reID) mechanisms for long-term association [2, 28, 40, 52, 57].
Analogously, various graph approaches rely on local track-ers to perform short-term association [4,15,16]. All of these hybrid multi-level approaches have two main limitations.
The first one is scalability since current methods cannot deal with long videos. As we increase the timespan between detections to be linked, association becomes more ambigu-ous due to significant appearance changes and large dis-placements. Hence, local trackers using a handcrafted com-bination of appearance and motion cues will fail to scale to arbitrary timespans. Graph-based methods are more ro-bust, but association for large timespans entails the creation of very large graphs (even if combined with local methods), which is infeasible both computationally and memory-wise.
The second limitation is generality. Using different techniques for different timespans requires making strong assumptions about the cues needed at each temporal scale, which limits the applicability of these approaches. For in-stance, in tracking scenarios where people dress uniformly and frame rate is high, e.g. dancing videos [41], proximity or motion-based local trackers [2,3,65,67] are more reliable than appearance-based trackers. On the other hand, in the presence of heavy camera motion or low frame rates, the performance of the aforementioned trackers degrades sig-nificantly, and appearance may become the most reliable cue [30, 60]. Overall, these discrepancies lead inevitably to handcrafted solutions for each type of scenario.
In this work, we ask the following question: can we de-sign a unified method that generalizes to multiple timespans and further scales to long videos?
We propose a method that processes videos hierarchi-cally: lower levels of our hierarchy focus on short-term as-sociation, and higher levels focus on increasingly long-term scenarios. The key differences to existing hybrid multi-level solutions is that we use the same learnable model for all time scales, i.e., hierarchy levels. Instead of hand-crafting different models for different scales, we show that our model can learn to exploit the cues that are best suited for each time-scale in a data-driven manner. Furthermore, our hierarchy allows a finer-grained transition from short to long-term instead of using two distinct stages. Our method targets the two main limitations of previous works: (i) its hierarchical structure makes it highly scalable and enables processing long clips efficiently, and (ii) it is highly gen-eral and does not make any assumptions about which cues are best suited for which timespans, but instead allows the model to obtain the necessary cues in a data-driven manner.
We, therefore, obtain a Strong tracker, with a Unified so-lution across timespans, and good Scalability thanks to its
HIerarchical nature, and name it SUSHI.
At its core, SUSHI is a graph method, but instead of working on a single monolithic graph, we embrace the dif-ferent nature of data association over different timespans and operate on a hierarchy of graphs. At the lowest level of our hierarchy, nodes represent object detections in nearby frames. We use a graph neural network (GNN) [4, 13, 39] to process those into short tracklets, and then build new graphs to generate increasingly longer trajectories at ev-ery level of our hierarchy. Notably, we use the same GNN architecture at every level. Thus we do not make any as-sumptions about what cues are best for each timespan. We demonstrate the generality of our approach by showing sig-nificant identity preservation improvements over the state-of-the-art in several highly diverse benchmarks: up to +4.7
IDF1 on MOT17 [9], +9.1 IDF1 on MOT20 [10], +9.5 IDF1 on DanceTrack [41], and +4.2 IDF1 on BDD [60], therefore setting new state-of-the-art results by a significant margin. 2.