Abstract
Unpaired image-to-image translation aims to learn proper mappings that can map images from one domain to another domain while preserving the content of the input image. However, with large enough capacities, the network can learn to map the inputs to any random permutation of images in another domain. Existing methods treat two do-mains as discrete and propose different assumptions to ad-dress this problem. In this paper, we start from a different perspective and consider the paths connecting the two do-mains. We assume that the optimal path length between the input and output image should be the shortest among all possible paths. Based on this assumption, we propose a new method to allow generating images along the path and present a simple way to encourage the network to find the shortest path without pair information. Extensive experi-ments on various tasks demonstrate the superiority of our approach. The code is available at https://github.com/Mid-Push/santa. 1.

Introduction
Many important problems in computer vision can be viewed as image-to-image translation problems, including domain adaptation [22, 46], super-resolution [7, 66] and medical image analysis [2]. Let X and Y represent two domains, respectively. In unpaired image-to-image transla-tion, we are given two collections of images from the two domains with distributions {PX , PY } without pair informa-tion. Our goal is to find the true conditional (joint) distribu-tion of two domains PY|X (PX ,Y ); with the true conditional (joint) distribution, we are able to translate the input images in one domain such that the outputs look like images in an-other domain while the semantic information of the input images is preserved. For example, given old human faces in one domain and young human faces in another domain, we
Figure 1.
Illustration of our shortest path assumption. Almost existing methods only use two discrete domains {X , Y}. Instead, we consider the paths connecting two domains and assume that the optimal mapping generates shortest path, e.g., x1 → y1 rather than x1 → y2. want to learn the true joint distribution across the two do-mains. Then we can translate the old face into young face image while preserving the important information (e.g., the identity) of the input face (see Fig. 1).
However, there can exist an infinite number of joint dis-tributions corresponding to the given two marginal distri-butions [39]. It means that the problem is highly ill-posed and we may not derive meaningful results without any ad-ditional assumptions. As one of the most popular assump-tions, cycle consistency [71] assumes that the optimal map-ping should be one-to-one and has been achieving impres-sive performance in many tasks. However, the one-to-one mapping assumption can be restrictive sometimes [48], es-pecially when images from one domain have additional in-formation compared to the other domain. As an alterna-tive, contrastive learning based method [48] has become
It assumes that the mutual information popular recently. of patches in the same location of the input and translated image should be maximized. Then it employs the infoNCE loss [57] to associate corresponding patches and disassoci-ate them from others. However, it has been shown that the choices of samples in the contrastive learning can have large impact on the results and most of recent image translation
methods are trying to improve it, e.g., negative sample min-ing [30, 58, 68] and positive sample mining [24].
Departing from existing unpaired image translation methods, we consider the paths connecting images in the first domain to images in the second domain and propose a shortest path assumption to address the ill-posed joint dis-tribution learning problem. Specifically, we assume that the path, connecting one image in the first domain to its cor-responding paired image in another domain, should be the shortest one compared to other paths (see Fig. 1). However, as we are only given images from two discrete domains, we have no access to real images on the paths. To address this problem, we first make a shared generating assump-tion to allow synthesizing images along the path: images are generated with the same function from the shared latent code space and the domain variable (as a surrogate of the domain-specific information). Then by changing the value of the domain variable, we obtain a path connecting the in-put and output image. In order to find a proper mapping, we need to minimize the path length, which can be formulated as expectation of the norm of the Jacobian matrix with re-spect to the domain variable. To reduce the cost of comput-ing the high-dimensional Jacobian matrix computation, we further propose to use finite difference method to approx-imate the Jacobian matrix and penalize the squared norm.
The contributions of this paper lie in the following aspects: 1. We propose a shortest path assumption to address the ill-posed unpaired image translation problem. We also conduct experiments to justify our assumption. 2. We propose a simple and efficient way to allow syn-thesizing images on the path connecting two domains and penalize the path length to find a proper mapping.
Our method is the fastest one among all unpaired im-age translation methods. 3. Extensive experiments are conducted to demonstrate the superiority of our proposed method. 2.