Abstract
Unsupervised visible-infrared person re-identiﬁcation is a challenging task due to the large modality gap and the unavailability of cross-modality correspondences. Cross-modality correspondences are very crucial to bridge the
Some existing works try to mine cross-modality gap. modality correspondences, but they focus only on local in-formation. They do not fully exploit the global relationship across identities, thus limiting the quality of the mined cor-respondences. Worse still, the number of clusters of the two modalities is often inconsistent, exacerbating the unrelia-bility of the generated correspondences.
In response, we devise a Progressive Graph Matching method to globally mine cross-modality correspondences under cluster imbal-ance scenarios. PGM formulates correspondence mining as a graph matching process and considers the global infor-mation by minimizing the global matching cost, where the matching cost measures the dissimilarity of clusters. Be-sides, PGM adopts a progressive strategy to address the imbalance issue with multiple dynamic matching processes.
Based on PGM, we design an Alternate Cross Contrastive
Learning (ACCL) module to reduce the modality gap with the mined cross-modality correspondences, while mitigat-ing the effect of noise in correspondences through an alter-nate scheme. Extensive experiments demonstrate the reli-ability of the generated correspondences and the effective-ness of our method. 1.

Introduction
The target of visible-infrared person re-identiﬁcation
[23, 25, 38, 51, 52] is to recognize the same (VI-ReID) person across a set of visible/infrared gallery images when given an image from another modality. This task has at-*Corresponding Author: Mang Ye (cid:1830)(cid:3036)(cid:3041)(cid:3047)(cid:3032)(cid:3045) (cid:1830)(cid:3036)(cid:3041)(cid:3047)(cid:3045)(cid:3028) (cid:1830)(cid:3036)(cid:3041)(cid:3047)(cid:3032)(cid:3045) (cid:1576) (cid:1830)(cid:3036)(cid:3041)(cid:3047)(cid:3045)(cid:3028)
Feature distribution (a) Illustration of the problem (cid:2273)(cid:3019)
Modality  graph
Correspondences for
Final matching results (b) Illustration of the existing work
/
/
Visible / Infrared Cluster
Unmatched/ Matched Cluster (cid:2273)(cid:3023)
Remaining nodes
Reconstructed modality graph (cid:2273)(cid:3019) (cid:2273)(cid:3023)(cid:4594) x i r t a m t s o
C
Globally optimal correspondence
Cost matrix (c) Illustration of the proposed Progressive Graph Matching
Idea illustration. Different colors indicate different
Figure 1. pedestrians. (a) illustrates the feature distribution of randomly selected persons of SYSU-MM01. The cross-modality discrep-ancy is much larger than inter-class variance within each modality. (b) abstracts the existing solution. The locally closest unmatched cross-modality cluster is treated as correspondence. Bottom of (b) indicates its two drawbacks: 1) it ignores the global information among different identities and 2) it ignores the cluster imbalance issue across modalities and discards remaining nodes (
). (c) is the progressive graph matching method. We utilize graph match-ing to obtain the globally optimal correspondences and design a progressive strategy to handle the cluster imbalance issue. tracted extensive interest recently due to its signiﬁcance in night intelligent surveillance and public security. Many pro-gresses [3, 5, 29, 40, 51] have been made in VI-ReID. How-ever, these methods require well-annotated training sets which are exhausting to obtain, so they are less applicable  
in real scenarios. In light of this limitation, we attempt to investigate an unsupervised solution for VI-ReID.
For unsupervised single-modality ReID, widely-studied works [4, 7, 9, 34, 42, 57] utilize cluster-based methods to produce supervision signals in the homogeneous space.
However, in the visible-infrared heterogeneous space, the consistency of features and semantics cannot be maintained due to the large modality gap. Speciﬁcally, the cross-modality difference is much larger than the inter-class dis-crepancy within each modality (see Fig. 1a). Hence, we cannot establish connections between the two modalities by adopting off-the-shelf clustering methods. However, cross-modality correspondences play an important role in bridg-ing the modality gap between two heterogeneous modal-ities [25, 29, 40, 51, 52]. Without reliable cross-modality correspondences, the model can hardly learn modality-invariant features.
Some efforts [22,33,45] have been made recently to ﬁnd cross-modality correspondences. However, most of the ex-isting methods consider only local information and do not take full advantage of the global relationship among dif-ferent identities (see Fig. 1b). What’s worse, they are not applicable to scenarios with cluster imbalance problems, since some clusters cannot ﬁnd their correspondences, hin-dering the later modality gap reduction process. To globally mine cross-modality correspondences under cluster imbal-ance scenarios, we propose a Progressive Graph Matching (PGM) method. It is featured for two designs, i.e., 1) con-necting the two modalities with graph matching and 2) ad-dressing the imbalance issue with the progressive strategy.
First, we employ graph matching to fully utilize the rela-tionship among different identities under global constraints (see Fig. 1c left). PGM formulates the cross-modality cor-respondences mining process as a bipartite graph matching problem with each modality as a graph and each cluster as a node. The matching cost between nodes is positively corre-lated with the distance of clusters. By minimizing the global matching cost, graph matching is expected to generate more reliable correspondences with global consideration. Graph matching has been demonstrated to have an advantage in unsupervised correspondence localization between two fea-ture sets [6, 35, 44, 49, 50]. With this property, we are in-spired to construct a graph for each modality and link the same person across different modalities.
Second, we propose a progressive strategy to tackle the imbalance problem. Basic graph matching cannot han-dle the cluster imbalance issue across modalities, which is caused by camera variations within class. Instances of the same person are sometimes split into different clusters [4, 57] and some clusters cannot ﬁnd their cross-modality cor-respondences (see Fig. 1c). This correspondence-missing problem affects the further modality discrepancy decrease.
In response, we propose to ﬁnd the correspondence for each cluster through multiple dynamic matching (see Fig. 1c right). The subgraphs in the bipartite graph are dynami-cally updated according to the previous matching results un-til each cluster progressively ﬁnds its correspondence. With the progressive strategy, different clusters with the same person ID could ﬁnd the same cross-modality correspon-dences. Therefore, these many-to-one matching results alle-viate the imbalance issue and also implicitly enhance intra-class compactness.
In addition, to fully exploit the mined cross-modality correspondences, we design a novel Alternate Cross Con-trastive Learning (ACCL) module. Inspired by supervised methods like [23,25,47], Cross Contrastive Learning (CCL) reduces the modality discrepancy by pulling the instance close to its corresponding cross-modality proxy and push-ing it away from other proxies. However, unlike the super-vised setting, the cross-modality correspondences generated by unsupervised methods are inevitably noisy, so directly combining the two unidirectional metric losses (visible to infrared and infrared to visible) may lead to rapid false “as-sociation”. We propose to alternately use two unidirectional metric losses so that positive cross-modality pairs can be associated by stages. This alternate scheme mitigates the effect of noise since the false positive pairs do not remain for long. In an alternative way, the noise effect would be reduced (as detailed in Sec. 3.3).
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose the PGM method to mine reliable cross-modality correspondences for unsupervised VI-ReID.
We ﬁrst build modality graph and perform graph matching to consider global information among iden-tities and devise a progressive strategy to make the matching process applicable to imbalanced clusters.
• We design ACCL to decrease the modality dispar-ity, which promotes the learning of modality-invariant information by gathering the instance to its corre-sponding cross-modality proxy. The alternate updat-ing scheme is designed to mitigate the effect of noisy cross-modality correspondences.
• Extensive experiments demonstrate that PGM method provides relatively reliable cross-modality correspon-dences and our proposed method achieves signiﬁcant improvement in unsupervised VI-ReID. 2.