Abstract
Recently, Multiple Object Tracking has achieved great success, which consists of object detection, feature embed-ding, and identity association. Existing methods apply the three-step or two-step paradigm to generate robust trajec-tories, where identity association is independent of other components. However, the independent identity associa-tion results in the identity-aware knowledge contained in the tracklet not be used to boost the detection and embed-ding modules. To overcome the limitations of existing meth-ods, we introduce a novel Unified Tracking Model (UTM) to bridge those three components for generating a positive feedback loop with mutual benefits. The key insight of UTM is the Identity-Aware Feature Enhancement (IAFE), which is applied to bridge and benefit these three components by utilizing the identity-aware knowledge to boost detec-tion and embedding. Formally, IAFE contains the Identity-Aware Boosting Attention (IABA) and the Identity-Aware
Erasing Attention (IAEA), where IABA enhances the consis-tent regions between the current frame feature and identity-aware knowledge, and IAEA suppresses the distracted re-gions in the current frame feature. With better detections and embeddings, higher-quality tracklets can also be gener-ated. Extensive experiments of public and private detections on three benchmarks demonstrate the robustness of UTM. 1.

Introduction
Multiple Object Tracking (MOT) aims at locating and identifying all of the moving objects in the video, which has broad application prospects in visual surveillance, human-computer interaction, virtual reality, and unmanned vehi-cles. With the rapid development of object detection [12, 34, 35, 66], Tracking-By-Detection has became a favorite
Figure 1. Comparison of different MOT frameworks in existing methods. (a) Separate Detection and Embedding (SDE) [2]. (b)
Joint Detection and Embedding (JDE) [50]. (c) The proposed Uni-fied Tracking Model (UTM) that constructed with Identity-Aware
Feature Enhancement (IAFE) module. paradigm in MOT. Recently, a number of Tracking-By-Detection approaches have been proposed, which can be divided into two paradigms: Separate Detection and Em-bedding (SDE) [1, 2, 4, 5, 8, 10, 16, 25, 38, 43, 52, 54], and
Joint Detection and Embedding (JDE) [15, 29, 45, 50, 64].
As illustrated in Figure 1(a), SDE can be divided into three independent components: object detection, feature embedding, and identity association1. Candidate bound-ing boxes (bboxes) are obtained by standard detectors in each frame first, then identity embedding of each bbox is extracted by the re-identification algorithms, finally linked across frames through identity association to generate tra-1In this paper, identity association includes affinity computation and
*indicates corresponding author: Changsheng Xu. data association.
jectories. Therefore, SDE mainly exploits refining detec-tion [2, 16], enhancing identity embedding [1, 25, 38, 52], or designing robust association algorithms [5, 8, 54] to im-prove tracking performance. With the maturity of multi-task learning, some approaches [45, 50, 64] propose JDE framework to reduce the computation cost. Different from
SDE, JDE applies the one-shot tracker to generate object detections and corresponding visual embeddings simultane-ously, thus treating MOT as two independent components, shown in Figure 1(b). Since the identity association in the above two paradigms is independent of object detection and feature embedding, the significant clues contained in the tracklet cannot be applied to enhance the detection and em-bedding modules.
To address the above problem, a feasible idea is in-troducing an auxiliary module to associate and propagate identity-aware knowledge between the identity association and the other two components. Therefore, we design a novel Identity-Aware Feature Enhancement (IAFE) module to achieve information interaction between different com-ponents, shown in Figure 1(c). In detail, IAFE propagates the identity-aware knowledge generated by identity asso-ciation module to enhance the backbone feature of object detection. Meanwhile, the enhanced backbone feature can be utilized by the feature embedding module to generate discriminative embeddings. With more accurate detections and robust embeddings, the identity association module can produce higher-quality tracklets. Therefore, object detec-tion, feature embedding, and identity association are in-volved with each other, thus forming a positive feedback loop with mutual benefits.
As shown in Figure 2, the proposed Unified Tracking
Model (UTM) is composed of IAFE, detection branch, embedding branch, identity association branch, and mem-ory aggregation module. The detection and embedding branches are applied to locate and identify each object of the current frame, and the identity association branch ap-plies graph matching to associate the candidate bboxes with history tracklets. To achieve information interaction, IAFE is proposed to bridge and benefit these three branches, which utilizes the identity-aware knowledge to boost the detection and embedding. Specifically, IAFE consists of two modules: Identity-Aware Boosting Attention (IABA) and Identity-Aware Erasing Attention (IAEA), where IABA boosts the consistent regions between the current frame fea-ture and identity-aware knowledge, and IAEA erases the distracted regions in the current frame feature. With the designed IAFE, UTM constructs a positive feedback loop among all the three branches to improve the performance of MOT. Furthermore, we introduce a memory aggregation module to capture identity-aware knowledge through adap-tively selecting features of history frames, which can allevi-ate the effect of identity switches.
The main contributions of the proposed method can be summarized as follows:
• We design an Identity-Aware Feature Enhancement (IAFE) module to bridge and benefit different com-ponents in MOT. Specifically, it utilizes the identity-aware knowledge to boost backbone feature, which is further used to enhance the detection and embedding.
• With the proposed IAFE, we construct a Unified
Tracking Model (UTM) to form a positive feedback loop with mutual benefits.
• The evaluation of public and private detections on three benchmarks verifies the effectiveness and gen-eralization ability of the proposed UTM. 2.