Abstract
Deep image recognition models suffer a signiﬁcant per-formance drop when applied to low-quality images since they are trained on high-quality images. Although many studies have investigated to solve the issue through image restoration or domain adaptation, the former focuses on vi-sual quality rather than recognition quality, while the lat-ter requires semantic annotations for task-speciﬁc training.
In this paper, to address more practical scenarios, we pro-pose a Visual Recognition-Driven Image Restoration net-work for multiple degradation, dubbed VRD-IR, to recover high-quality images from various unknown corruption types from the perspective of visual recognition within one model.
Concretely, we harmonize the semantic representations of diverse degraded images into a uniﬁed space in a dynamic manner, and then optimize them towards intrinsic semantics recovery. Moreover, a prior-ascribing optimization strat-egy is introduced to encourage VRD-IR to couple with var-ious downstream recognition tasks better. Our VRD-IR is corruption- and recognition-agnostic, and can be inserted into various recognition tasks directly as an image enhance-ment module. Extensive experiments on multiple image dis-tortions demonstrate that our VRD-IR surpasses existing image restoration methods and show superior performance on diverse high-level tasks, including classiﬁcation, detec-tion, and person re-identiﬁcation. 1.

Introduction
We have witnessed the remarkable success made by deep learning in image recognition tasks in recent years, such as classiﬁcation [25,33,66], detection [23,46,62,68], and seg-mentation [9,51]. However, most of these approaches lever-age the public datasets with high-quality images (e.g., Ima-*Equal contribution
†Corresponding Author 75 65 55 45 35 25 15 5
)
% ( 6 1
G
G
V n o y c a r u c c
A 1
-p o
T
B
U
C
Clean Image
VRD-IR
URIE
AirNet
FDGAN
MPRNet
DDP
Hazy Image
AODNet
EPRN 12 13 14
DehazeNet 15 16
PSNR (dB) 17 18 19 20
Figure 1. Illustration of visual quality and recognition quality us-ing different dehazing methods on hazy CUB [73]. The top-1 ac-curacy is evaluated by VGG16 [66] pre-trained on clean CUB. Our method, VRD-IR, is shown in bold. As we can see, higher visual quality doesn’t mean higher recognition quality. geNet [64], CoCo [47]) for training, and they suffer a signif-icant drop when applied to low-quality images (e.g., hazy, rainy, and noisy), since the statistical properties of pixels are ruined by image degradation [75].
An intuitive approach to tackle this issue is to restore the distorted images ﬁrst, and then feed them into the succeed-ing recognition models. With this line, various image en-hancement methods have been developed to improve the hu-man visual quality of corrupted images [15, 90]. However, the visual quality and the recognition quality of an image differ fundamentally from one another. As shown in Fig. 1, the restored image with higher visual effect cannot guaran-tee satisfactory performance on downstream high-level vi-sion tasks [57, 67, 81].
Another feasible solution is to encourage the recognition models to learn corruption-invariant feature representations, which can be applied to low-quality images directly without image recovery. For that purpose, numerous datasets have          
been created [26,50,80]. One common method is to narrow the distribution distance between low- and high- quality im-ages in feature space [32,37,67,81]. While promising, most of these methods neglect the fact that the adverse impacts of different degradation are quite different on semantic level.
On the other hand, they either assume that the task-speciﬁc annotations is available during training, or just could han-dle a single corruption/recognition task only, which hinders the timely adaptation to changing external environment and adjustment to ﬂexible high-level tasks in real-world.
In this paper, we propose a visual recognition-driven im-age restoration (VRD-IR) for multiple degradation, to re-cover the recognition-friendly high-quality image from its given degraded version without knowing the speciﬁc degra-dation type and downstream high-level tasks. We ﬁrst har-monize the semantic features suffered from different degra-dation into a uniﬁed representation spaces, and then opti-mize them towards semantic recovery. Speciﬁcally, we de-sign a model paradigm: Intrinsic Semantics Enhancement (ISE), which can restore different degraded semantic repre-sentations in a dynamic manner. It consists of a Degradation
Normalization and Compensation (DNC) module for map-ping different degraded features to a degradation-invariant space, and a Fourier Guided Modulation (FGM) for guid-ing the feature enhancement from the statistical properties in amplitude spectrum. For better perception of different semantics, a prior-ascribing optimization strategy is pro-posed. A semantic aware decoder (SAD) is ﬁrst pre-trained on both low- and high- quality images with the objective to reconstruct the high-quality image from the corresponding semantic features. To make full use of semantic information and provide good guidance for ISE, a similarity ranking loss is enforced during the pre-training of SAD. Then, we ﬁx the pre-trained SAD and force the ISE to improve the quality of images reconstructed by SAD through enhancing the de-graded semantic representations. In this way, we encourage the ISE to modulate the degraded input features from the perspective of machine vision.
Moreover, the proposed VRD-IR can be plugged into pre-trained recognition models directly as a data enhance-ment module. Compared with feature distillation-based methods that require task-speciﬁc annotations for training, our VRD-IR enjoys better ﬂexibility and practicality.
We summarize our main contributions as follows:
• To the best of our knowledge, VRD-IR is the ﬁrst attempt towards a pure universal image restoration framework for high-level vision. As the VRD-IR can be integrated with various recognition models directly, it is more practical in real world scenario.
• Considering the adverse impacts of different degrada-tion in semantics, we design an Intrinsic Semantic En-hancement (ISE) module to modulate the degraded se-mantic representation in a dynamic manner.
• A prior-ascribing optimization strategy is proposed to endow VRD-IR with capability to perceive degrada-tion effects on semantic level. Guided by this, our ISE can modulate degraded features from the perspective of machine vision.
• We verify the effectiveness of our framework on di-verse high-level vision tasks, including classiﬁcation, detection, and person re-identiﬁcation. Experiments results show the superiority of our method in recogni-tion tasks under multiple degradation. 2.