Abstract
Because the subtle differences between the different sub-categories of common visual categories such as bird species, fine-grained classification has been seen as a chal-lenging task for many years. Most previous works focus towards the features in the single discriminative region iso-latedly, while neglect the connection between the different discriminative regions in the whole image. However, the relationship between different discriminative regions con-tains rich posture information and by adding the posture information, model can learn the behavior of the object which attribute to improve the classification performance.
In this paper, we propose a novel fine-grained framework named PMRC (posture mining and reverse cross-entropy), which is able to combine with different backbones to good effect. In PMRC, we use the Deep Navigator to generate the discriminative regions from the images, and then use them to construct the graph. We aggregate the graph by mes-sage passing and get the classification results. Specifically, in order to force PMRC to learn how to mine the posture information, we design a novel training paradigm, which makes the Deep Navigator and message passing communi-cate and train together. In addition, we propose the reverse cross-entropy (RCE) and demomenstate that compared to the cross-entropy (CE), RCE can not only promote the ac-curracy of our model but also generalize to promote the ac-curacy of other kinds of fine-grained classification models.
Experimental results on benchmark datasets confirm that
PMRC can achieve state-of-the-art. 1.

Introduction
Fine-grained clssification tasks have been seen as quite challenging tasks because the visual differences between the fine-grained classification datasets are hard to recog-nize. For ordinary people, we can do the normal classifi-cation easily, but as for the fine-grained classification, only experts with professional knowledge can do it. Therefore,
†Equal contribution. ∗Corresponding author.
Figure 1. The overview of PMRC. Firstly, we use the Deep Navi-gator to generate the discriminative regions. Then we construct the graph. Finally, we aggregate the graph through message passing and classify the graph. compared to category-level classification, fine-grained clas-sification is more chanllenging.
There have been many predecessors on fine-grained clas-sification. Works in [2,4,7,12,16,25,31,45,48] can achieve good performance on fine-grained classification. However, their training and testing phase both need bounding box an-notations which cost a lot of manual labour and are always error-prone. Then works in [3, 20] develp the methods and use the annotations only in training phase. More recent works develop methods that don’t need bounding box anno-tations in training phase or testing phase [18, 22, 26, 47]. It is a general idea to create graph using local regions. How-ever, related existing method [44, 49] is not easy to trans-plant, and it is difficult to perceive discriminative regions with correct context information and the relationship be-tween regions. We propose a method that can be conve-niently combined with different backbones, and propose a novel learning strategy to ensure that the model can per-ceive the correct discriminative regions and their relation-ships (posture information). In addition, our RCE is simple to implement and has better performance than CE.
The framework we propose, which we term PMRC (pos-ture mining and RCE), use the Deep Navigator and graph neural network to mine the posture information from the fine-grained images and use RCE to promote the perfor-mance. PMRC is able to combine with different backbones to good effect. We design the loss to make PMRC learn the way to mine the posture information from the images, which include guide the Deep Navigator to search the dis-criminative regions and guide the message passing module to percept the posture information based on the discrimina-tive regions. Besides, the reason we use RCE instead of CE is that although CE can be seen as an appropriate loss func-tion for the normal classification, in training phase, for each sample, it focuses on completing the correct classification as much as possible. In network learning phase, it only con-centrates on improving the score of positive labels output by softmax layer, while ignoring the information contained in negative labels. Because of the characteristics of fine-grained classification, negative labels which contain sub-tle inter-class difference information are very significant.
Compared with CE, RCE learns the inter-class difference information by reversing the label score of softmax output layer, so that it has a better effect on fine-grained classifica-tion. Specifically, our PMRC has three main steps (see in
Figure. 1).
The main contributions of this paper are as follows: (1)
We propose a simple framework to mine the posture infor-mation in fine-grained classification images, our framework is able to combine easily with different backbones to good effect. (2) We design a novel learning strategy. For the posture mining part, the loss of the Deep Navigator and the loss of message passing communicate with each other to make the model learn how to mine the posture infor-mation. For the classification part, we use RCE loss func-tion which can effectively learn the inter-class differences of the samples. (3) PMRC can be trained end-to-end without bounding-box/part annotations. We achieve state-of-the-art on commonly used benchmark. 2.