Abstract
Inferring past human motion from RGB images is chal-lenging due to the inherent uncertainty of the prediction problem. Thermal images, on the other hand, encode traces of past human-object interactions left in the envi-ronment via thermal radiation measurement. Based on this observation, we collect the first RGB-Thermal dataset for human motion analysis, dubbed Thermal-IM. Then we develop a three-stage neural network model for accu-rate past human pose estimation. Comprehensive experi-ments show that thermal cues significantly reduce the am-biguities of this task, and the proposed model achieves is available at remarkable performance. https://github.com/ZitianTang/Thermal-IM.
The dataset 1.

Introduction
Imagine we have a robot assistant at home. When it comes to offering help, it may wonder what we did in the past. For instance, it wonders which cups were used, then cleans them. Or it can better predict our future actions once the past is known. But how can it know this? Consider the images in Fig. 1. Can you tell what happened 3 sec-onds ago? An image contains a wealth of information. The robot may extract geometric and semantic cues, infer the affordance of the scene, and imagine how humans would interact and fit in the environment. Therefore, in the left image, it can confidently deduce that the person was sitting on the couch; however, it is not sure where. Similarly, it can imagine many possibilities in the right image but cannot be
Corresponding to: hangzhao@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn. certain. Indeed, given a single RGB image, the problem is inherently ill-posed.
In this paper, we investigate the use of a novel sensor modality, thermal data, for past human behavior analysis.
Thermal images are typically captured by infrared cameras, with their pixel values representing the temperature at the corresponding locations in the scene. As heat transfer oc-curs whenever there is contact or interaction between hu-man bodies and their environment, thermal images serve as strong indicators of where and what has happened. Con-sider the thermal images in Fig. 2. With thermal images, we can instantly determine where the person was sitting. This is because the objects they contacted were heated, leaving behind bright marks. If a robot assistant is equipped with a thermal camera, it can more effectively infer the past and provide better assistance. Otherwise, we may need a camera installed in every room and keep them operational through-out the day.
With these motivations in mind, we propose to develop a system that, given an indoor thermal image with a human in it, generates several possible poses of the person N (N = 3) seconds ago. To achieve this goal, we first collect a Thermal
Indoor Motion dataset (Thermal-IM) composed of RGB, thermal, and depth videos of indoor human motion with es-timated human poses.
In each video, the actor performs various indoor movements (e.g., walking, sitting, kneeling) and interacts with different objects (e.g., couch, chair, cabi-net, table) in a room. Then we design a novel, interpretable model for past human pose estimation. The model consists of three stages: the first stage proposes where the human might have been 3 seconds ago, leveraging the most dis-cernible information in thermal images. The second stage infers what action the human was performing. Finally, the
Figure 2. Thermal images to the rescue: Thermal images encode traces of past human-object interactions, which can help us infer past human behavior and understand objects’ affordance. In this work, we focus on estimating human body poses a few seconds ago. third stage synthesizes an exact pose.
Experiments show that our method managed to gener-ate plausible past poses based on the locations and shapes of thermal cues. These results are more accurate than the
RGB-only counterparts, thanks to the reduced uncertainty of past human movements. Furthermore, our model auto-matically and implicitly discovers the correlation between thermal mark intensity and time.
The contributions of this work are the following:
• We make the first attempt at a novel past human motion estimation task by exploiting thermal footprints.
• We construct the Thermal-IM dataset, which contains synchronized RGB-Thermal and RGB-Depth videos of indoor human motion.
• We propose an effective three-stage model to infer past human motion from thermal images. 2.