Abstract 3D reconstruction is a fundamental problem in computer vision, and the task is especially challenging when the object to reconstruct is partially or fully occluded. We introduce a method that uses the shadows cast by an unobserved object in order to infer the possible 3D volumes under occlusion.
We create a differentiable image formation model that allows us to jointly infer the 3D shape of an object, its pose, and the position of a light source. Since the approach is end-to-end differentiable, we are able to integrate learned priors of object geometry in order to generate realistic 3D shapes of different object categories. Experiments and visualizations show that the method is able to generate multiple possible solutions that are consistent with the observation of the shadow. Our approach works even when the position of the light source and object pose are both unknown. Our approach is also robust to real-world images where ground-truth shadow mask is unknown. 1.

Introduction
Reconstructing the 3D shape of objects is a fundamental challenge in computer vision, with a number of applications in robotics, graphics, and data science. The task aims to estimate a 3D model from one or more camera views, and re-searchers over the last twenty years have developed excellent methods to reconstruct visible objects [1, 13–15, 24, 25, 43].
However, objects are often occluded, with the line of sight obstructed either by another object in the scene, or by them-selves (self-occlusion). Reconstruction from a single image is an under-constrained problem, and occlusions further re-duce the number of constraints. To reconstruct occluded objects, we need to rely on additional context.
One piece of evidence that people use to uncover occlu-sions is the shadow cast on the floor by the hidden object.
For example, figure 1 shows a scene with an object that has become fully occluded. Even though no appearance features are visible, the shadow reveals that another object exists be-hind the chair, and the silhouette constrains the possible 3D shapes of the occluded object. What hidden object caused that shadow?
In this paper, we introduce a framework for reconstructing 3D objects from their shadows. We formulate a generative model of objects and their shadows cast by a light source, which we use to jointly infer the 3D shape, its pose, and the location of the light source. Our model is fully differen-tiable, which allows us to use gradient descent to efficiently search for the best shapes that explain the observed shadow.
Our approach integrates both learned empirical priors about
Figure 1. We introduce a method to perform 3D reconstruction from the shadow cast on the floor by occluded objects. In the middle, we visualize our reconstruction of the occluded chair from a new camera view.
the geometry of typical objects and the geometry of cam-eras in order to estimate realistic 3D volumes that are often encountered in the visual world.
Since we model the image formation process, we are able to jointly reason over the object geometry and the parame-ters of the light source. When the light source is unknown, we recover multiple different shapes and multiple different positions of the light source that are consistent with each other. When the light source location is known, our approach can make use of that information to further refine its outputs.
We validate our approach for a number of different object categories on a new ground truth dataset.
The primary contribution of this paper is a method to use the shadows in a scene to infer the 3D structure, and the rest of the paper will analyze this technique in detail. Section 2 provides a brief overview of related work for using shadows.
Section 3 formulates a generative model for objects and how they cast shadows, which we are able to invert in order to in-fer shapes from shadows. Section 4 analyzes the capabilities of this approaches with a known and unknown light source.
We believe the ability to use shadows to estimate the spatial structure of the scene will have a large impact on computer vision systems’ ability to robustly handle occlusions. 2.