Abstract
Recent advances in learning 3D shapes using neural im-plicit functions have achieved impressive results by break-ing the previous barrier of resolution and diversity for varying topologies. However, most of such approaches are limited to closed surfaces as they require the space to be divided into inside and outside. More recent works based on unsigned distance function have been proposed to handle complex geometry containing both the open and closed surfaces. Nonetheless, as their direct outputs are point clouds, robustly obtaining high-quality meshing re-sults from discrete points remains an open question. We present a novel learnable implicit representation, called three-pole signed distance function (3PSDF), that can rep-resent non-watertight 3D shapes with arbitrary topologies while supporting easy ﬁeld-to-mesh conversion using the classic Marching Cubes algorithm. The key to our method is the introduction of a new sign, the NULL sign, in addition to the conventional in and out labels. The existence of the null sign could stop the formation of a closed isosurface derived from the bisector of the in/out regions. Further, we propose a dedicated learning framework to effectively learn 3PSDF without worrying about the vanishing gradient due to the null labels. Experimental results show that our approach outperforms the previous state-of-the-art methods in a wide range of benchmarks both quantitatively and qualitatively. 1.

Introduction
The choice of representation for 3D shapes and surfaces has been a central topic for effective 3D learning. Various 3D representations, including mesh [18,41], voxels [36,42], and point cloud [31,32], have been extensively studied over the past years. Recently, the advent of neural implicit func-tions (NIF) [6, 20, 26, 29] has brought impressive advances to the state-of-the-art of learning-based 3D reconstruction and modeling.
Classic NIF approaches are built upon the signed dis-tance function (SDF); they train a deep neural network to classify continuous 3D locations as inside or outside the sur-face via occupancy prediction or regressing the SDF. How-ever, they can only model closed surfaces that support the in/out test for level surface extraction. Recent advances that leverage unsigned distance function (UDF) [10,39,40] have made it possible to learn open surfaces from point clouds.
But instantiating this ﬁeld into an explicit mesh remains cumbersome and is prone to artifacts. It requires the gen-eration of dense point cloud and leveraging UDF’s gradient
ﬁeld to iteratively push the points onto the target surface.
Such process is vulnerable to complex gradient landscape, e.g., parts with many details, and could easily get stuck at a local minima. In addition, reconstruction of mesh from
UDF has to use the Ball Pivoting (BP) algorithm which has several drawbacks. 1) It is very sensitive to the input ball radius. A slightly larger or smaller radius would lead to an incomplete meshing result. 2) It is prone to generate self-intersections and disconnected face patches with incon-sistent normals even with surfaces of moderate complexity (see the clothing result in Figure 3). 3) The BP algorithm is very time-consuming especially dealing with dense point clouds. Finally, learning UDF becomes a regression task instead of classiﬁcation like for SDF, making the training more difﬁcult. We show in the closeups of Figure 1 that
NDF [8] cannot reconstruct the face details of the ﬁrst char-acter even with 1 million sampling points.
We overcome the above limitations by presenting a new learnable implicit representation, called Three-Pole Signed
Distance Function (3PSDF), which is capable of represent-ing highly intricate geometries containing both closed and open surfaces with high ﬁdelity (see Figure 1).
In addi-tion, 3PSDF makes the learning an easy-to-train classiﬁca-tion task, and is compatible with classic and efﬁcient iso-surface extraction techniques, e.g. the Marching Cubes al-gorithm. The key idea of our approach is the introduction of a direction-less sign, the NULL sign, into the conventional binary-sided signed distance function. Points with null sign will be assigned with nan value, preventing the decision boundary to be formed between them and their neighbors.
Therefore, by properly distributing the null signs over the space, we are able to cast surfaces with arbitrary topolo-gies (see Figure 2). Similar to previous works based on occupancy prediction [6, 26], we train a neural network to classify continuous points into 3 categories: inside, outside, and null. The resulting labels can be converted back to the 3PSDF using a simple mapping function to obtain meshing result.
We evaluate 3PSDF on three different tasks with gradu-ally increased difﬁculty: shape reconstruction, point cloud completion and single-view reconstruction. 3PSDF can consistently outperform the state-of-the-art methods over including ShapeNet [5], a wide range of benchmarks,
MGN [4], Maximo [1], and 3D-Front [16], both quantita-tively and qualitatively. We also conduct comparisons of
ﬁeld-to-mesh conversion time with NDF and analyze the impact of different resolutions and sampling strategies on our approach. Our contributions can be summarized as:
• We present a new learnable 3D representation, 3PSDF, that can represent highly intricate shapes with both closed and open surfaces while being compatible with existing level surface extraction techniques.
• We propose a simple yet effective learning paradigm for 3PSDF that enables it to handle challenging task like single-view reconstruction.
• We obtain SOTA results on three applications across a wide range of benchmarks using 3PSDF. 2.