Abstract
In this paper, we introduce VCSL (Video Copy Segment
Localization), a new comprehensive segment-level anno-tated video copy dataset. Compared with existing copy de-tection datasets restricted by either video-level annotation or small-scale, VCSL not only has two orders of magnitude more segment-level labelled data, with 160k realistic video copy pairs containing more than 280k localized copied seg-ment pairs, but also covers a variety of video categories and a wide range of video duration. All the copied seg-ments inside each collected video pair are manually ex-tracted and accompanied by precisely annotated starting and ending timestamps. Alongside the dataset, we also propose a novel evaluation protocol that better measures the prediction accuracy of copy overlapping segments be-tween a video pair and shows improved adaptability in dif-ferent scenarios. By benchmarking several baseline and state-of-the-art segment-level video copy detection methods with the proposed dataset and evaluation metric, we pro-vide a comprehensive analysis that uncovers the strengths and weaknesses of current approaches, hoping to open up promising directions for future works. The VCSL dataset, metric and benchmark codes are all publicly available at https://github.com/alipay/VCSL. 1.

Introduction
In recent years, the wide spread of pirated multimedia has attracted attention from both users and platforms all over the world. The dramatic rise of pirated content has been fueled by the large amounts of user-generated con-tent (UGC) and professionally-generated content (PGC) up-loaded to content sharing market, e.g., over 500 hours of video are uploaded to YouTube every minute [1] , the av-erage monthly paying users of Bilibili have increased by
∗These authors contributed equally to this research.
†Corresponding author. 62% in one year alone [2]. These videos can generate sig-niﬁcant advertising revenue, providing strong incentive for unscrupulous individuals that wish to capitalize on this bo-nanza by skillful copyright infringement [3]. Some video editing specialists even design methods to evade infringe-ment detection algorithms by cropping, melting, and merg-ing short clips from popular videos which make accurate copy detection even more challenging. Given the esca-lating adversarial relation between the platform algorithm and evolved piracy, comprehensive datasets with real par-tial video infringement become increasingly essential.
Besides copyright protection, a video copy detection (VCD) system is important in applications like video clas-siﬁcation, tracking, ﬁltering and recommendation [4–6]. In most cases, video-level copy detection results alone are not sufﬁcient as the detected videos are usually displayed and interacted with system users for downstream tasks. Hence, designing an approach that can locate the copied segments is preferred and has already attracted lots of attentions in recent works [7–11].
However, manually annotating copied segments between videos is time-consuming and costly. Some datasets for copy detection, e.g., CCWEB [12], FIVR [13] and SVD
[14] provide only video-level annotation indicating whether two videos contain copied parts or not, which is coarse-grained and incapable of evaluating segment-level copy detection methods. Other datasets, e.g., MUSCLE-VCD
[15] and TRECVID [16], produce automatically segment-level labels by generating simulated copied segments with pre-deﬁned transformations, which may not be representa-tive for real-world data [11]. The only manually-labelled segment-level dataset, VCDB [11] released in 2014, con-tains only 6k labelled videos pairs with 9k segment pairs, and over 70% of copy durations are less than 1minute. The annotation quantity and video diversity of existing datasets are not sufﬁcient to develop segment-level video copy de-tection algorithms that need training data and labels.
To address these issues, we present a comprehensive dataset, VCSL, speciﬁcally designed for segment-level
video copy detection. This dataset, which will be made publicly available, contains over 160k infringed video pairs with 280k carefully annotated segment pairs. All of these videos are realistic copies from Youtube or Bilibili, which cover a wide range of video topics including movies, music videos, sports, etc.
Meanwhile, existing evaluation protocols for segment-level video copy detection exhibit an obvious drawback that most of them utilize ground-truth copied segments as queries rather than the entire videos [7, 8, 11]. This is un-practical for real copy detection scenario where it is hard to know a priori that which part of a video will be pirated.
Hence, we indicate a protocol that is more realistic with a pair of copied videos as input, and a new metric is jointly proposed to address previous unreasonable issues. With the awareness of both copied segments and overlap accu-racy, our proposed metric fully considers the distinctiveness regarding the segment division equivalence (illustrated in
Sec.4.1) of copy detection task, and it is more suitable and robust for various infringe situations.
Furthermore, we introduce a benchmark for segment-level video copy detection. We decouple the entire al-gorithm process into two main algorithm modules: fea-ture extraction and temporal alignment. Then we eval-uate the baseline and state-of-the-art (SOTA) algorithms of both parts on the splitted test set of VCSL. The com-ponents described above represent a complete benchmark suite, providing researchers with the necessary tools to fa-cilitate the evaluation of their methods and advance the ﬁeld of segment-level video copy detection. 2.