Abstract
Lines are among the most used computer vision features, in applications such as camera calibration to object de-tection. Catadioptric cameras with rotationally symmetric mirrors are omnidirectional imaging devices, capturing up to a 360 degrees field of view. These are used in many ap-plications ranging from robotics to panoramic vision. Al-though known for some specific configurations, the mod-eling of line projection was never fully solved for general central and non-central catadioptric cameras. We start by taking some general point reflection assumptions and de-rive a line reflection constraint. This constraint is then used to define a line projection into the image. Next, we com-pare our model with previous methods, showing that our general approach outputs the same polynomial degrees as previous configuration-specific systems. We run several ex-periments using synthetic and real-world data, validating our line projection model. Lastly, we show an application of our methods to an absolute camera pose problem. 1.

Introduction
Catadioptric cameras are imaging devices combining general mirrors with perspective cameras, [41]. These sys-tems are used to get up to a 360-degree field of view with a single image and are suitable for applications ranging from robotics to medical imaging. In theory, particular cases of catadioptric cameras can be modeled by the central perspec-tive model [3]1. However, this modeling requires the use of specific mirrors and that the camera is perfectly aligned and at a specific distance concerning the mirror’s positions.
Therefore, even if possible in theory, as argued in [53], cata-dioptric camera systems are non-central cameras.
Due to their non-linear distortions, modeling point and line projections in catadioptric systems are significantly more complex than in the perspective cameras. Researchers 1Only two combinations of mirror settings and perspective camera po-sitions are possible. Table 1 shows these two cases. made a big effort to derive a unified model for the projection of points, firstly only for central systems, [4, 18], and for general configurations, central and non-central, [1, 2]. On the other hand, although solved for some particular config-urations, e.g., [1, 4, 7, 8], a unified model for line projection was never proposed.
Line projections have been used in many computer vi-sion applications, such as: i) camera calibration [15, 28, 36, 46]; ii) epipolar geometry [5, 25, 31, 50, 52]; iii) the
Structure-from-Motion, and pose estimation [12, 20, 26, 37, 43, 47]; iv) and 3D reconstruction [10, 19, 35, 38].
In all these examples, we assume the use of central systems. To develop a similar application using catadioptric systems, we need to derive the respective projection of straight lines. A couple of papers [35,56] are published on self-calibration of non-central catadioptric cameras using the epipolar geom-etry. However, the authors assume central approximations for computing epipolar lines, i.e., approximation of the pro-jection of 3D lines by a central camera model. On the other hand, imaging models for representing any camera (cen-tral and non-central) have been proposed; see [24, 40, 49].
[51, 59] list the advantages of non-central cameras com-pared to central. For example, when using a non-central camera, a single image of the environment is enough to re-cover the line’s 3D parameters, e.g., [11, 17, 29, 54]).
This paper presents the first unified model for the pro-jection of 3D straight lines in general catadioptric cameras with rotationally symmetric mirrors; central and non-central systems. In Tab. 1, we show the degrees of the polynomi-als of prior specifically-derived methods and some results obtained from our derivations. Next, we present the related work. Secs. 3 and 4 define the problem and derive the pro-posed unified model. Section 5 presents the experiments and Sec. 6 concludes the paper. 2.