Abstract
Existing active learning studies typically work in the closed-set setting by assuming that all data examples to be labeled are drawn from known classes. However, in real annotation tasks, the unlabeled data usually contains a large amount of examples from unknown classes, resulting in the failure of most active learning methods. To tackle this open-set annotation (OSA) problem, we propose a new active learning framework called LfOSA, which boosts the classi-fication performance with an effective sampling strategy to precisely detect examples from known classes for annotation.
The LfOSA framework introduces an auxiliary network to model the per-example max activation value (MAV) distribu-tion with a Gaussian Mixture Model, which can dynamically select the examples with highest probability from known classes in the unlabeled set. Moreover, by reducing the tem-perature T of the loss function, the detection model will be further optimized by exploiting both known and unknown su-pervision. The experimental results show that the proposed method can significantly improve the selection quality of known classes, and achieve higher classification accuracy with lower annotation cost than state-of-the-art active learn-ing methods. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work of active learning for open-set annotation. 1.

Introduction
The remarkable success of deep learning is largely at-tributed to the collection of large datasets with human an-notated labels [12, 15]. Nevertheless, it is extremely ex-pensive and time-consuming to label large scale data with high-quality annotations [26, 29]. It is thus a significant challenge to learn with limited labeled data.
Active learning (AL) is a primary approach to tackle this problem.
It iteratively selects the most useful examples from the unlabeled data to query their labels from the oracle,
*This work is done when Kun-Peng Ning and Yu Li worked at Applied
Research Center, Tencent PCG.
†Corresponding authors.
Figure 1. The illustration of open-set annotation (OSA) problem.
The unlabeled open-set contains K known classes (color images with border) and L unknown classes (gray-scale images without border). The goal is to find and annotate the examples from known classes for training the classifier. achieving competitive performance while reducing annota-tion costs [10, 26, 28]. Existing AL methods typically work in a closed-set setting where the labeled and unlabeled data are both drawn from the same class distribution.
However, in some real world scenarios, the unlabeled data are usually uncontrolled and large amounts of data ex-amples are from unknown classes. Figure 1 displays an example of training a new sports image classification model for an image-sharing social platform, in which the database contains trillions of images from unconstrained categories uploaded by users. A large proportion of images in the un-labeled open-set are actually from irrelevant classes (e.g., cats, pianos, etc.). As these irrelevant images are not neces-sary for training the desired classifier, labelling these images would lead to a waste of annotation budget. On the other hand, existing closed-set AL system cannot precisely dis-tinguish these irrelevant images from unknown classes but tends to choose them for annotation as they contain more uncertainty or information. Hence, in the real-world open-set scenario, an effective and practical AL system is highly desired, which can precisely identify the examples of un-wanted classes while querying the most useful cases from the wanted classes to train the classifier.
In this paper, we formulate this problem as an open-set annotation (OSA) task. As shown in Figure 1, the unla-beled set contains K known classes and L unknown classes, where L>K. The goal is to precisely filter out examples from unknown classes, while actively select a query set that contains examples from known classes as pure as possi-ble. To overcome this challenge, we propose a new active learning framework called LfOSA (Learning from Open-Set
Annotation), which includes two networks for detection and classification respectively. Specifically, the detector models the per-example max activation value (MAV) distribution with a Gaussian Mixture Model [21] to dynamically divide the unlabeled open-set into known and unknown set, then examples from the known set with larger certainty will be selected to construct a query set for annotation. After label-ing, the classification model will be updated with the new examples from known classes. Meanwhile, as the query set will inevitably include a few invalid examples from unknown classes, these invalid examples will be utilized as negative training examples to update the detector, such that the de-tector can maintain a higher recall to identify known-class examples from the unlabeled open-set. Moreover, by reduc-ing the temperature T of the cross-entropy (CE) loss, the distinguishability of the detector is further enhanced.
Experiments are conducted on multiple datasets with dif-ferent mismatch ratios of known and unknown classes. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed approach can significantly improve the selection quality of known classes, and achieve higher classification accuracy with lower annotation cost than state-of-the-art active learning methods.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We review the related work in Section 2 and introduce the proposed method in Section 3. Section 4 reports the experiments, followed by the conclusion in Section 5. 2.