Abstract
Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) is most often approached in the tracking-by-detection paradigm, where object detec-tions are associated through time. The association step nat-urally leads to discrete optimization problems. As these optimization problems are often NP-hard, they can only be solved exactly for small instances on current hard-ware. Adiabatic quantum computing (AQC) offers a solu-tion for this, as it has the potential to provide a consid-erable speedup on a range of NP-hard optimization prob-lems in the near future. However, current MOT formulations are unsuitable for quantum computing due to their scaling properties. In this work, we therefore propose the ﬁrst MOT formulation designed to be solved with AQC. We employ an
Ising model that represents the quantum mechanical sys-tem implemented on the AQC. We show that our approach is competitive compared with state-of-the-art optimization-based approaches, even when using of-the-shelf integer pro-gramming solvers. Finally, we demonstrate that our MOT problem is already solvable on the current generation of real quantum computers for small examples, and analyze the properties of the measured solutions. 1.

Introduction
Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) is a task in computer vision that requires solving NP-hard assignment prob-lems [29,30,50]. To make this feasible, the community pro-posed a range of different approaches: work on the problem formulation using domain knowledge helps to make it an easier to solve problem [29,50], approximate solvers extend the feasible problem size [30], and the combination of deep learning with simple heuristics can be seen as a data-driven approach to the problem [8, 12]. Nevertheless, integer as-signment problems remain hard optimization tasks for any available solver. With the recent progress in quantum com-puting, a new way of solving such optimization problems becomes feasible in the near future [1, 36, 51].
Instead of iteratively exploring possible solutions, e.g.
Figure 1. The proposed approach to MOT states the assignment problem between detections and a set of tracks as a quadratic un-constrained binary optimization task. We then represent the op-timization problem as a quantum mechanical system that can be implemented on an AQC. Via quantum annealing, a minimum en-ergy state is found that represent the best assignment. via branch and bound, the problem is mapped to a quan-tum mechanical system, whose energy is equivalent to the cost of the optimization problem. Therefore, if it is possi-ble to measure the lowest energy state of the system, a so-lution to the corresponding optimization problem is found.
This is done with an adiabatic quantum computer (AQC), which implements a quantum mechanical system made from qubits and can be described by the Ising model [31].
Using this approach, a quantum speedup, which further
scales with system size and temperature, has already been shown for applications in physics [35, 36].
While there is a range of advantages that quantum com-puting can provide in the future, mapping a problem to an
AQC is not trivial and often requires reformulating the prob-lem from scratch, even for well investigated tasks [4, 6]. On the one hand, the problem needs to be matched to the Ising model, on the other hand, real quantum computers have a very limited number of qubits and are still prone to noise, which requires tuning of the model to handle the limitations.
In this work we present the ﬁrst quantum computing approach to MOT. The number of required qubits in our formulation grows linearly in the number of detections, tracks and timesteps and only requires entanglement be-tween qubits to model long-term relations. Our overall con-tributions are the following:
• A quantum computing formulation of MOT that is competitive with state-of-the-art methods.
• A method using few problem measurements to ﬁnd La-grange multipliers that considerably improve solution probability.
• Extensive MOT experiments on synthetic as well as real data using a D-wave AQC.
The remaining paper is structured as follows: After pre-senting related work, the basics of quantum computing are introduced. This is followed by our MOT formulation that is optimized to run on an AQC. We then show the changes required to make the problem solvable also with the classi-cal computing paradigm. Finally, experiments on a D-wave quantum computer are presented together with results on larger problem instances. 2.