Abstract
The Skinned Multi-Person Linear (SMPL) model repre-sents human bodies by mapping pose and shape parameters to body meshes. However, not all pose and shape parame-ter values yield physically-plausible or even realistic body meshes.
In other words, SMPL is under-constrained and may yield invalid results.
We propose learning a prior that restricts the SMPL pa-rameters to values that produce realistic poses via adver-sarial training. We show that our learned prior covers the diversity of the real-data distribution, facilitates optimiza-tion for 3D reconstruction from 2D keypoints, and yields better pose estimates when used for regression from images.
For all these tasks, it outperforms the state-of-the-art VAE-based approach to constraining the SMPL parameters. The code will be made available at https://github.com/ cvlab-epfl/adv_param_pose_prior. 1.

Introduction
The SMPL model [17] is now widely used to parame-terize body poses and shapes [15, 21]. However, it offers no guarantee to produce realistic human bodies when ran-dom values are passed as its inputs. This complicates its us-age within an optimization, regression, or generative frame-works, where it is desirable that any sample drawn be plau-sible.
To mitigate this issue, several approaches have been
In [2], this is addressed by introducing a Gaus-used. sian Mixture Model (GMM) learned on the SMPL pose.
Unfortunately, due to its unbounded nature, it still allows poses far away from any training example and potentially
In SMPL-X [22], a Variational Autoencoder unrealistic.
*This work was supported in part by the Swiss National Science Foun-dation (VAE) is used instead to learn a low-dimensional represen-tation of the SMPL parameters. This choice was motivated by the ability of VAEs to model the distribution of valid data samples in the latent space as a multivariate Gaussian, which was shown to better approximate the data distribu-tion than classical models, such as GMMs, while also fa-cilitating sampling at test time.
In both approaches, the learned prior is then used together with other losses in an optimization-based framework that aims at ﬁnding plausi-ble human meshes. Unfortunately, VAEs have drawbacks.
First, their learned prior tends to be mean-centered and to discard part of the original data distribution that are far away from it. Furthermore, its Gaussian prior is unbounded, like that of GMMs. Hence, one can also sample latent values far away from any in the training set and produce unrealis-tic bodies. Adversarial training has been used to bound the parameter prediction of SMPL in regression-based frame-works [5, 11]. However, this requires balancing the adver-sarial loss with other losses. More importantly, no explicit prior has been learned in such cases, as this training needs to be repeated for each new task.
In short, these approaches make it necessary to bal-ance different losses and do not bound the inputs of the
SMPL model. In contrast, we aim at learning a prior, that once learned can be used in an optimization or learning-based frameworks, without the requirement of enforcing constraints on it. In other words, the learned prior should be integrated as part of the SMPL model and the model can be optimized only on the target loss, where the learned prior is not added as an extra constraint. To this end, we learn an explicit prior, that constrains the input of the SMPL model to be realistic poses via adversarial training. This has to be done only once and independently of the target applica-tion so that no further adversarial training is needed. Hence, it does not require balancing multiple losses in the down-stream tasks.
Furthermore, one can use a bounded distribution, such as
Figure 1. Multiple uses of the proposed approach. (A) The adversarial game between generator G and discriminator D guarantees that the former provides realistic body poses. (B) Given “start” and “end” latent vectors, one can render the whole sequences of plausible and smooth body interpolations. (C) To optimize for corresponding poses given target keypoints Y, akin to VPoser [22], the pretrained generator G can be used as an implicit pose prior. (D) The pretrained G can be dropped in as a pose prior in a pretrained off-the-shelf human mesh regressor. It improves the prediction quality of the regressor. uniform or spherical ones, in the input space of the learned prior, which facilitates plausible sample generation and also its integration in regression frameworks, as by limiting the output of the preceding component that is passed as input to the learned prior, one is always guaranteed to have a plau-sible human representation. Once trained, our model can be used in many different settings without further retrain-ing as shown in Fig. 1. We introduce GAN-based pose prior learning technique that consistently outperforms the
VAE-based state-of-the-art approach for both optimization-and regression-based approaches to human body pose re-covery [22]. Also, we make a comparision between differ-ent choices of latent spaces, out of which the spherical one brings the most beneﬁt. 2.