Abstract
Text logo design heavily relies on the creativity and ex-pertise of professional designers, in which arranging ele-ment layouts is one of the most important procedures. How-ever, few attention has been paid to this task which needs to take many factors (e.g., fonts, linguistics, topics, etc.) into consideration.
In this paper, we propose a content-aware layout generation network which takes glyph images and their corresponding text as input and synthesizes aes-thetic layouts for them automatically. Specifically, we de-velop a dual-discriminator module, including a sequence discriminator and an image discriminator, to evaluate both the character placing trajectories and rendered shapes of synthesized text logos, respectively. Furthermore, we fuse the information of linguistics from texts and visual seman-tics from glyphs to guide layout prediction, which both play important roles in professional layout design. To train and evaluate our approach, we construct a dataset named as
TextLogo3K, consisting of about 3,500 text logo images and their pixel-level annotations. Experimental studies on this dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach for synthesizing visually-pleasing text logos and verify its su-periority against the state of the art. 1.

Introduction
Creative AI has attracted considerable interests in recent years. Automatic layout design is a promising and valu-able technique, which is quite helpful to facilitate the tasks of designers and improve the efficiency of creating media content. One intuitive way to achieve this goal is to gen-erate layouts by defining specific easy-to-execute rules, but the results are typically plain and without design aesthetics.
Therefore, various methods [1, 5, 6, 11, 15–17, 35, 38] based on deep generative models (such as GAN [4] and VAE [12]) have been proposed recently to synthesize graphic layouts by learning from human-designed data. Text logo design is a challenging task because many factors need to be taken
*This work was partly done when Yizhi Wang was an intern in Tencent
†Corresponding author. E-mail: lianzhouhui@pku.edu.cn
Figure 1. Examples of some commonly seen layout types for text logos. “Trans.” denotes transformation. Yellow boxes denote the bounding boxes of characters/words. into consideration, such as fonts, layouts, and textures. As we know, the layout of a text logo is closely related to the logo’s text and the selected font styles. However, existing approaches [5, 16, 17, 38] exploit only the visual, category, and topic (keyword) information of elements, or combine some of them to generate the layouts. In fact, the seman-tics of texts are also very important to determine the lay-out design. As shown in Figure 1, in a desired layout, the
Chinese character “爱” (“love”) is a verb and the key char-acter in the text logo, so it is emphasized by a larger font size than other characters such as “如果” (“if”), which is a less-important conjunction word. Moreover, the synthe-sized layouts need to take fine-grained details into consid-eration, such as avoiding the collision of strokes of different
In addition, the placing trajectories of characters glyphs. should follow a correct order for reading (e.g., left to right and up to bottom for English) and possess diverse styles at the same time, which cannot be easily handled by non-sequence generation models.
In this paper, we cast the layout synthesis of text logos as a sequence generation problem and employ a GAN-based model1 to solve it. In our approach, a dual-modality fusion scheme is proposed to encode both the visual and linguis-tic cues of the input glyphs/text as the condition of GAN.
It is widely acknowledged that using GAN to generate dis-crete sequences is difficult. However, the geometric param-eters of design elements are continuous in our task, mak-ing GAN training on the sequence of geometric parameters 1Code and dataset: https://github.com/yizhiwang96/TextLogoLayout
feasible. As mentioned above, fine-grained details such as glyph collisions and character placing trajectories are crit-ical for the aesthetic quality of a text logo. To this end, a dual-discriminator module is proposed to capture both the character placing trajectory and rendered shape of the syn-thesized text logo. The placing trajectories of characters are supervised by a sequence discriminator, to guarantee that (1) they follow the correct reading order; and (2) they pos-sess various styles like the human-designed ones. More-over, by proposing a differentiable composition method, we build a bridge between the synthesized layouts and rendered text logo images. At the same time, an image discrimina-tor is also employed to capture the detailed structures of the synthesized text logos, whose visual quality can be further improved in this manner.
To train and evaluate our model, a large-scale dataset of text logos, TextLogo3K, is constructed with pixel-wise an-notations. Extensive experiments including ablation studies and method comparison have been conducted on the new dataset. Experimental results clearly demonstrate the effec-tiveness and advantages of our proposed method. We also demonstrate how our proposed model can be integrated with font generation [33] and texture transfer [22] models to au-tomatically synthesize visually-pleasing text logos. To the best of our knowledge, this work presents the first text logo synthesis method that is capable of taking both linguistic (i.e., text contents) and visual (i.e., glyph shapes, font styles, and textures) information into account like professional hu-man designers. Furthermore, our TextLogo3K is also the first dataset that specifically targets at the task of text logo synthesis, which will be released to promote the investiga-tion of this topic and other relevant tasks in the community. 2.