Abstract
Time-of-flight (ToF) sensors provide an image modal-ity fueling diverse applications, including LiDAR in au-tonomous driving, robotics, and augmented reality. Con-ventional ToF imaging methods estimate depth by sending pulses of light into a scene and measuring the ToF of the first-arriving photons directly reflected from a scene surface without any temporal delay. As such, all photons follow-ing this first response are typically considered as unwanted
In this paper, we depart from the principle of us-noise. ing first-arriving photons and propose an all-photon ToF imaging method that relies on the temporal-polarimetric analysis of first- and late-arriving photons which encode rich scene information in terms of geometry and material.
To this end, we propose a novel temporal-polarimetric re-flectance model, an efficient capture method, and a recon-struction method that exploits the temporal-polarimetric changes of light reflected by the surface and sub-surface reflection. The proposed all-photon polarimetric ToF imag-ing method allows us to acquire depth, surface normals, and material parameters of a scene by utilizing all photons cap-tured by the system, whereas conventional ToF imaging only obtains coarse depth from the first-arriving photons. We validate our method in simulation and experimentally with a prototype system. 1.

Introduction
Depth cameras have equipped us with the ability to ac-quire scene geometry that is essential for 3D vision both directly as a geometric input to a perception or reconstruc-tion method, and indirectly, as training data for supervised learning in rich 3D vision datasets [9,11,42]. As such, depth sensor have fueled diverse applications across domains, in-cluding autonomous vehicles, virtual and augmented real-ity, mobile photography, and robotics. A large body of prior work explores different approaches to extract depth, includ-ing parallax [37], defocus [23], double refraction [4], and
In particular, pulsed ToF cam-correlation imaging [22]. eras [32] have been rapidly adopted across application do-mains for their high depth precision, low baseline, long
In contrast to
Figure 1. All-photon polarimetric ToF imaging. conventional ToF imaging methods that analyze the first-reflected light, we propose to capture and exploit both early and late pho-tons and untangle them via polarization. We analyze temporal-polarimetric characteristics of surface and sub-surface reflections that enable us to infer scene parameters (depth, normals, and ma-terial parameters) from all captured photons. range and robustness to scene texture.
ToF cameras directly measure the round-trip return time of light emitted into a scene. This requires high-speed sen-sors and electronics that can time-tag photon arrival events, such as single-photon avalanche diode (SPAD) and time-correlated single-photon counting (TSCPC) electronics. By repeating pulses and recording arrival events hundreds of thousands of times per measurement, these pulsed ToF cam-eras are capable of recording an entire temporal histogram for each pixel, reporting the number of photons detected by the sensor for each travel time bin.
Photons that arrive at different times at a single pixel can be broadly categorized into two temporally distinct compo-nents that sum up to the total measured photons. The first group of photons originates from the light directly reflected off from an object surface. Therefore, this surface reflec-tion allows for estimating the object depth directly from its
ToF measurement. Surface reflection often has higher in-tensity in comparison to the other component. As a result, one common practice for ToF depth imaging is to estimate
In the ToF through peak-finding over the photon counts. contrast to the surface reflection, the second group of pho-tons comes from the light that penetrates the object surface, undergoes sub-surface scattering, and leaves the surface to-wards the detector. This sub-surface scattered light arrives at the sensor with a longer travel time than the light origi-nating from surface reflections. At first glance, sub-surface scattering appears to harm accurate depth estimation as it disturbs the true ToF by an additional unknown scatter-ing time. Existing ToF methods typically discard this sub-surface observation and only rely on the surface reflection.
In this work, we treat this sub-surface scattering com-ponent as a signal instead of noise in estimating geometric and material properties of a scene. The proposed all-photon
ToF imaging method combines ToF imaging with polariza-tion analysis, exploiting the unique temporal-polarimetric signature of surface and sub-surface reflections, as shown in
Figure 1. The proposed method hinges on a novel temporal-polarimetric bidirectional reflectance distribution function (BRDF) model that describes both surface and sub-surface reflections in temporal and polarimetric domains. We im-plement this BRDF model with differentiable operators al-lowing us to pose scene reconstruction as an inverse ren-dering problem. To efficiently acquire high-dimensional polarimetric-temporal data, we also propose a light-efficient temporal-polarimetric acquisition approach that captures the temporal-polarimetric signals of a scene combined with a learned optical ellipsometry. We demonstrate that all-photon polarimetric ToF imaging can record diverse scene information, including depth, normals, and material param-eters from temporal-polarimetric measurements – both in simulation and experimentally. Specifically, we make the following contributions.
• We devise an all-photon polarimetric ToF imaging method that combines ToF imaging and polarization analysis to jointly exploit surface and sub-surface re-flected photons for scene reconstruction.
• We present the first temporal-polarimetric BRDF model which characterizes surface and sub-surface re-flection based on micro-facet theory and the Stokes-Mueller formalism.
• We propose an efficient temporal-polarimetric acqui-sition approach tailored for polarimetric imaging with polarized-laser illumination.
• We validate our method in simulation and with an ex-perimental prototype for capturing depth, normals, and material parameters.
Limitations As a result of the mechanical rotation of the polarizing optics and sequential scanning, the acquisi-tion of the temporal-polarimetric data takes five hours for each scene. We note that the limited number of temporal-polarimetric photons and low sensor quantum efficiency makes the acquisition challenging. In the future, accelerat-ing the polarimetric capture with electronically-controllable liquid crystal modulators instead of mechanically rotating polarizers, or using a polarization array filters placed on photon-efficient SPAD sensor arrays, may eliminate the need for sequential acquisition. Our experimental proto-type employs a laser module with low average power of 0.13 mW available to us. We note that higher-power laser sources are commercially available which could increase the signal-to-noise ratio of the measurements for a given exposure time budget. 2.