Abstract
Understanding animals’ behaviors is significant for a wide range of applications. However, existing animal be-havior datasets have limitations in multiple aspects, in-cluding limited numbers of animal classes, data samples and provided tasks, and also limited variations in environ-mental conditions and viewpoints. To address these lim-itations, we create a large and diverse dataset, Animal
Kingdom, that provides multiple annotated tasks to enable a more thorough understanding of natural animal behav-iors. The wild animal footages used in our dataset record different times of the day in extensive range of environ-ments containing variations in backgrounds, viewpoints, il-lumination and weather conditions. More specifically, our dataset contains 50 hours of annotated videos to localize relevant animal behavior segments in long videos for the video grounding task, 30K video sequences for the fine-grained multi-label action recognition task, and 33K frames for the pose estimation task, which correspond to a diverse range of animals with 850 species across 6 major animal classes. Such a challenging and comprehensive dataset shall be able to facilitate the community to develop, adapt, and evaluate various types of advanced methods for ani-mal behavior analysis. Moreover, we propose a Collabo-rative Action Recognition (CARe) model that learns gen-eral and specific features for action recognition with un-seen new animals. This method achieves promising perfor-mance in our experiments. Our dataset can be found at https://sutdcv.github.io/Animal-Kingdom. 1.

Introduction
A better understanding of how animals behave and move in the wild is not only a cornerstone of behavioral sciences
[24] but also crucial for a wide range of applications. Ani-mal behavioral analysis plays a pivotal role in conservation efforts [17, 62] and wildlife management [49]. Each year, the world spends at least $75 billion [43,68] in conservation
*Corresponding author.
‡
These authors contribute equally to this work. efforts. Before researchers can better protect the wildlife, they often need to first monitor the animals. Researchers often monitor animals using video cameras, without hav-ing to attach physical markers that may alter their natural behaviors [24]. By monitoring and analyzing the behav-iors of the animals, they can gain deeper insights into their health and needs [24], and even detect movement-related injuries [24]. In addition, detecting and analyzing changes in animal behaviors allow researchers to learn about new behaviors [1, 72]. Besides, animal behavioral analysis has also helped pharmaceutical scientists understand the effects of experimental interventions on behaviors, and neurosci-entists learn more about brain activity across different tem-poral scales [1, 24, 29, 42, 52]. These findings also help researchers better understand human diseases and develop drugs that are suitable for use in humans. Moreover, in-sights gained from analyzing animals’ behaviors have also played an important role in aiding engineers in design-ing bio-inspired robots [46, 83] to efficiently perform spe-cialised functions (e.g., lifesaving). Animators and game developers can also make use of the insights to realistically render animals in animations and games [8, 83]. In sum-mary, the analysis of animal behaviors is not only signifi-cant for ecological protection, but also significant in a wide range of applications, and thus has received more and more research attention recently [8,17,34,35,38,39,46,53,77,79].
Animal action analysis is especially important in the un-derstanding of the health and needs of animals. Given the diversity of animals’ actions, and how actions can occur and switch within split seconds, the use of video footages en-ables us to monitor multiple animals round the clock [1]. In addition, by localizing keypoints and employing pose esti-mation, we can analyze and identify changes in the animal’s pose to better interpret their actions and behaviors. Before we analyze animal behaviors, we may need to first identify the frames of interest, since oftentimes a large part of the animal footages may not even contain any animal [12, 44].
However, the vast volume of wildlife animal footages inher-ently make it both labour and time-intensive to identify ani-mals and actions. In view of this, employing video ground-ing [47, 81] will be effective to localize the animals and be-haviors of interest in long video streaming.
Previous studies [8, 72] show that a large and compre-hensive dataset is important to develop robust deep learn-ing models. However, many existing animal behavioral analysis datasets have limitations in multiple aspects: (1)
Relatively small dataset and scarcity of extensive and well-annotated labels [72], which reduce the generalization abil-ity and transferability of models [72]. In contrast, having a large and comprehensive dataset would be helpful to mit-(2) Limited number and limited diver-igate such issues. sity of animals [1, 72], as many of the existing datasets are designed for and to study specific groups of animals (e.g., mammals only). However, there is a far greater diversity of animals in nature, and the understanding of wildlife should not be restricted to only a few specific classes. Further-more, there exists a huge variety in shapes, sizes (e.g., dif-ferent stages in life cycle), body patterns (e.g., camouflage), and number of limbs or appendages (e.g., wings) within and across animal classes. Therefore, having an extensive range and diverse representation of animals in a dataset would im-prove the generalization ability of the model for analysing behaviors of various animal classes [72]. (3) Uniform envi-ronmental conditions (e.g., laboratory conditions or specific habitat) prevent the transferability of models to a different context (e.g., another habitat), because the models are of-ten not able to generalize well when the new data differs from those previously used for training [72]. Moreover, an-imals in the wild are naturally found at various locations, in different environmental conditions, and at different time periods, which in turn will all affect the appearances and behaviors of the animals [24]. However, many of the ex-isting datasets are confined to specific or uniform environ-mental set-ups. Therefore, it is essentially important to pos-sess a sizable range of environmental conditions and back-grounds. (4) Limited number of tasks and annotations for a more comprehensive analysis of animal behaviors. Most of the current datasets provide annotations of one task only, while different tasks can facilitate the understanding of ani-mal behaviors in different aspects.
Therefore, we create a diverse dataset, Animal Kingdom, for animal behavioral analysis from video grounding task that identifies and extracts the segments of relevant videos, to animal action recognition and pose estimation tasks to better understand animal behaviors. The natural behaviors of animals in the wild are generally dynamic, complex and noisy [42,52,69], and our diverse dataset is a good reflection of the realities in the wild. Besides constructing the Animal
Kingdom dataset, in this paper, we also design a simple yet effective Collaborative Action Recognition (CARe) model for action recognition with unseen new types of animals. 2.