Abstract
Blind-spot network (BSN) and its variants have made signiﬁcant advances in self-supervised denoising. Never-theless, they are still bound to synthetic noisy inputs due to less practical assumptions like pixel-wise independent noise. Hence, it is challenging to deal with spatially corre-lated real-world noise using self-supervised BSN. Recently, pixel-shufﬂe downsampling (PD) has been proposed to re-move the spatial correlation of real-world noise. However, it is not trivial to integrate PD and BSN directly, which prevents the fully self-supervised denoising model on real-world images. We propose an Asymmetric PD (AP) to ad-dress this issue, which introduces different PD stride factors for training and inference. We systematically demonstrate that the proposed AP can resolve inherent trade-offs caused by speciﬁc PD stride factors and make BSN applicable to practical scenarios. To this end, we develop AP-BSN, a state-of-the-art self-supervised denoising method for real-world sRGB images. We further propose random-replacing reﬁnement, which signiﬁcantly improves the performance of our AP-BSN without any additional parameters. Extensive studies demonstrate that our method outperforms the other self-supervised and even unpaired denoising methods by a large margin, without using any additional knowledge, e.g., noise level, regarding the underlying unknown noise. 1.

Introduction
Image denoising is one of the essential topics in the computer vision area, which aims to recover a clean image from the noisy signal. Due to its practical usage in several vision-related applications, several learning-based denois-ing algorithms [28, 36, 43, 44] have been proposed with the advent of convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Conven-tional methods usually adopt additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) to acquire large-scale training data by synthesiz-ing clean-noisy image pairs for supervised learning. Never-Code is available at: https://github.com/wooseoklee4/AP-BSN (a) DnCNN [43] ( Supervised ) (b) C2N [19] + DIDN [40] ( Unpaired ) (c) NAC [39] ( Self-supervised ) (d) AP-BSN + R3 (Ours) ( Self-supervised )
Figure 1. Visual comparison between different denoising meth-ods on the DND benchmark [34]. (a) DnCNN is trained on real-world noisy-clean pairs from the SIDD [1] dataset. (b) C2N uses clean SIDD [1] and noisy DND [34] samples to simulate real-world noise distribution in an unsupervised manner. (c–d) Self-supervised methods can be trained on the DND [34] noisy im-ages directly. We mark PSNR(dB) and SSIM with respect to the ground-truth clean image for the quantitative comparison. theless, models learned on the synthetic noise do not gener-alize well in practice since the characteristics of real-world noise differ much from AWGN. To overcome the limita-tion, several attempts have been made to construct pairs of real-world datasets like SIDD [1] and NIND [4]. Using the real-world training pairs, supervised denoising meth-ods [8, 16, 21, 41, 42] can be trained to restore clean images from the noisy real-world input. However, constructing the real-world dataset requires massive human labor, strictly controlled environments, and complicated post-processing.
In addition, it is difﬁcult to generalize the learned model toward diverse practical scenarios as the characteristic of noise varies much for the different capturing devices.
Recently, several self-supervised approaches [3, 17, 23, 24, 31, 38, 39] have been introduced, which do not rely on paired training data. Such methods require noisy im-ages only for training instead of clean-noisy pairs. Among them, Blind-Spot Network (BSN) [23] is one of the rep-resentative methods motivated by Noise2Noise [25]. Un-der the assumption that noise signals are pixel-wise inde-pendent and zero-mean, BSN reconstructs a clean pixel from the neighboring noisy pixels without referring to the corresponding input pixel. Based on BSN, several ap-proaches [15, 24, 37] have achieved better performance on synthetic noise while ensuring strict blindness w.r.t. the cen-ter pixel. However, real-world noises are known to be spatially-correlated [6, 20, 32], which does not meet the ba-sic assumption of BSN: noise is pixel-wise independent.
To break spatial correlation of real-world noise, Zhou et al. [45] utilize pixel-shufﬂe downsampling (PD). PD cre-ates a mosaic by subsampling a noisy image with a ﬁxed stride factor, and thereby increases an actual distance be-tween noise signals. Nevertheless, integrating PD to BSN is nontrivial when handling real-world noise in a fully self-supervised manner, where it cannot stand alone without knowledge from additional noisy-clean synthetic pairs [37].
We identify that the principal reason for such limitation is the trade-off between the pixel-wise independent assump-tion and reconstruction quality. For example, a large PD stride factor (> 3) ensures the strict pixel-wise independent noise assumption and beneﬁts BSN during training. How-ever, it also destructs detailed structures and textures from the noisy image. In contrast, a small PD stride factor (≤ 3) preserves image structures but cannot satisfy the pixel-wise independent assumption when training BSN.
Inspired by these observations, we propose Asymmet-ric PD (AP), which uses different stride factors for train-ing and inference. For real-world noise, we systematically validate that a speciﬁc combination of training and infer-ence strides can compensate shortcomings of each other.
Then, we integrate AP to BSN (AP-BSN), which can learn to denoise noisy real-world inputs in a fully self-supervised manner, without requiring any prior knowledge of under-lying noise. Furthermore, we propose random-replacing reﬁnement (R3), a novel post-processing method that im-proves the performance of our AP-BSN without any addi-tional training. To the best of our knowledge, our AP-BSN is the ﬁrst attempt to introduce self-supervised BSN for real-world sRGB noisy images. Extensive studies demonstrate that our method outperforms not only the state-of-the-art self-supervised denoising methods but also several unsuper-vised/unpaired approaches by a large margin. We summa-rize our contributions as follows:
• To handle spatially correlated real-world noise in a blind fashion, we propose a novel self-supervised AP-BSN.
Our framework employs asymmetric PD stride factors for training and inference in conjunction with BSN.
• We propose random-replacing reﬁnement (R3), a novel post-processing method that further improves our AP-BSN without any additional parameters.
• Our AP-BSN is the ﬁrst self-supervised BSN that cov-ers real-world sRGB noisy inputs and outperforms the other self-supervised and even several unpaired solutions by large margins. 2.