Abstract
Rigged puppets are one of the most prevalent represen-tations to create 2D character animations. Creating these puppets requires partitioning characters into independently moving parts. In this work, we present a method to auto-matically identify such articulated parts from a small set of character poses shown in a sprite sheet, which is an il-lustration of the character that artists often draw before puppet creation. Our method is trained to infer articu-lated parts, e.g. head, torso and limbs, that can be re-assembled to best reconstruct the given poses. Our re-sults demonstrate significantly better performance than al-ternatives qualitatively and quantitatively. Our project page https://zhan- xu.github.io/parts/ includes our code and data. 1.

Introduction
Creating rich, animated characters has traditionally been accomplished by independently drawing each frame of the character. To accelerate this process, tools have been de-veloped to allow precisely rigged 2D characters to be eas-ily rendered in different poses by manipulating the rig. To create these rigs, artists often start by drawing several dif-ferent poses and configurations of the complete character in a sprite sheet or turnaround sheet. They then manually seg-ment out the common parts in these sheets and stitch them together to create the final character rig, which can then be articulated to reconstruct the original character draw-ings [23]. The obtained parts from different sprite sheets can also be used as assets and assembled freely to create new character rigs1.
Significant expertise is required to create a well-rigged 2D character, and automatic rigging methods have several unique challenges. Animated characters can have a wide range of different limbs, accessories, and viewing angles, which prevents a single template from working across all characters. Furthermore, the amount of available exam-ples for rigged, animated characters is relatively small when compared against real datasets that can be acquired by mo-tion capture or other techniques. This limited data is par-ticularly challenging to work with because characters are 1https://pages.adobe.com/character/en/puppet-maker
Figure 1. Given sprite sheets as input (a), APES produces articu-lated parts (b) that can best express poses in the sprite sheets. The obtained parts can further be warped to generate new poses (c), or manipulated freely to create new puppets. often drawn and animated in different styles. Finally, poses shown in sprite sheets have both articulated variation and non-rigid deformation. Extracting articulated parts that ex-press given poses requires effective analysis of the motion demonstrated in sprite sheets.
We propose a method to automatically construct a 2D character rig from a sprite sheet containing a few examples of the character in different poses. Our rig is represented as a set of deformable layers [50], each capturing an articu-lated part. We assume that all characters in the sprite sheet can be reconstructed by applying a different deformation to each puppet layer and then compositing the layers together.
We start by learning a deep network that computes corre-spondences between all pairs of sprites. We then use these correspondences to compute possible segmentations of each sprite. Finally, we attempt to reconstruct the other sprites in the sprite sheet using the possible puppet segmentations, choosing the set with minimal overall reconstruction error.
We evaluate our method on several test sprite sheets.
We show that our method can successfully produce artic-ulated parts and significantly outperforms other represen-tative appearance and motion-based co-part segmentation works [16, 37]. Our contributions are the following:
• A method for analyzing a sprite sheet and creating a corresponding articulated character that can be used as a puppet for character animation.
• A neural architecture to predict pixel motions and clus-ter pixels into articulated moving parts without relying on a known character template.
• An optimization algorithm for selecting the character parts that can best reconstruct the given sprite poses. 2.