Abstract
Point cloud classifiers with rotation robustness have been widely discussed in the 3D deep learning community.
Most proposed methods either use rotation invariant de-scriptors as inputs or try to design rotation equivariant net-works. However, robust models generated by these meth-ods have limited performance under clean aligned datasets due to modifications on the original classifiers or input space.
In this study, for the first time, we show that the rotation robustness of point cloud classifiers can also be acquired via adversarial training with better performance on both rotated and clean datasets. Specifically, our pro-posed framework named ART-Point regards the rotation of the point cloud as an attack and improves rotation robust-ness by training the classifier on inputs with Adversarial
RoTations. We contribute an axis-wise rotation attack that uses back-propagated gradients of the pre-trained model to effectively find the adversarial rotations. To avoid model over-fitting on adversarial inputs, we construct rotation pools that leverage the transferability of adversarial rota-tions among samples to increase the diversity of training data. Moreover, we propose a fast one-step optimization to efficiently reach the final robust model. Experiments show that our proposed rotation attack achieves a high success rate and ART-Point can be used on most existing classifiers to improve the rotation robustness while showing better per-formance on clean datasets than state-of-the-art methods. 1.

Introduction
A very basic requirement for point cloud classification is expecting the network to obtain stable predictions on in-puts undergoing rigid transformations since such transfor-mations do not change the shape of the object, let alone change its semantic meanings. This basic requirement is even more important in practical applications. For exam-*Corresponding author. ple, when a robot is identifying and picking up an object, the object is usually in an unknown pose. However, many studies [7,17,51] have shown that most existing point cloud classifiers can be easily attacked by simply rotating the in-puts. To use these classifiers we require to align all input objects which is a very expensive and time-consuming pro-cess. To this end, how to improve the robustness of point cloud classifiers to arbitrary rotations, becomes a very pop-ular and necessary research topic.
In order to make the network robust to rotated inputs, most existing works can be classified into three categories: (1) Rotation Augmentation Methods attempt to augment the training data using rotations and have been widely used in the earlier point cloud classifiers [29, 30, 39]. How-ever, data augmentation can hardly be applied to improve model robustness to arbitrary rotations due to the astronom-ical number of rotated data [49]. (2) Rotation-Invariance
Methods propose to convert the input point clouds into ge-ometric descriptors that are invariant to rotations. Typi-cal invariant descriptors can be the distance and angles be-tween local point pairs [4, 8, 47, 48] or point norms [17, 49] and principal directions [47] calculated from global coor-dinates. (3) Rotation-Equivariance Methods try to solve the rotation problem from the perspective of model archi-tectures. For example, [5, 27, 37, 40] use convolution with steerable kernel bases to construct rotation-equivariant net-works and [7, 34, 50] modify existing networks with equiv-ariant operations. While both methods (2) and (3) can effec-tively improve model robustness to arbitrary rotations, they either require time-consuming pre-processing on inputs or need complex architectural modifications, which will result in limited performance on clean aligned datasets.
In this paper, we try to explore a new technical route for the rotation robustness problem in point clouds. Our method is inspired by adversarial training [22], a typical defense method to improve model robustness to attacks.
The idea of adversarial training is straightforward: it aug-ments training data with adversarial examples in each train-ing loop. Thus adversarially trained models behave more
normally when facing adversarial examples than standardly trained models. Adversarial training has shown its great ef-fectiveness in improving model robustness to image or text perturbations [9, 11, 21, 33, 44], while keeping a strong dis-In 3D point clouds, [18, 35, 36] also criminative ability. successfully leverage adversarial training to defend against point cloud perturbations such as random point shifting or removing. However, using adversarial training to improve the rotation robustness of point cloud classifiers has rarely been studied.
To this end, by regarding rotation as an attack, we de-velop the ART-Point framework to improve the rotation ro-bustness by training networks on inputs with Adversarial
RoTations. Like the general framework of adversarial train-ing, ART-Point forms a classic min-max problem, where the max step finds the most aggressive rotations, on which the min step is performed to optimize the network parameters for rotation robustness. For the max step, we propose an axis-wise rotation attack algorithm to find the most offen-sive rotating samples. Compared with the existing rotation attack algorithm [51] that directly optimizes the transfor-mation matrix, our method optimizes on the rotation angles which reduces the optimization parameters, while ensuring that the attack is pure rotation to serve for the adversarial training. For the min step, we follow the training scheme of the original classifier to retrain the network on the adver-sarial samples. To overcome the problem of over-fitting on adversarial samples caused by label leaking [15], we con-struct a rotation pool that leverages the transferability of ad-versarial rotations among point cloud samples to increase the diversity of training data. Finally, inspired by ensemble adversarial training [38], we contribute a fast one-step opti-mization method to solve the min-max problems. Instead of alternately optimizing the min-max problem until the model converges, the one-step method can quickly reach the final robust model with competitive performance.
Compared with the rotation-invariant and equivariant methods, the ART-Point framework aims to optimize net-work parameters such that the converged model is natu-rally robust to both arbitrary and adversarial rotations, with-out the necessity of either geometric descriptor extractions or architectural modifications that may impede the model to learn discriminative features. So our resulting robust model better inherits the original performance on the clean (aligned) datasets. It has no constraint on the model design and can be integrated on most point cloud classifiers.
In experiments, we mainly verify the effectiveness of our methods under two datasets ModelNet40 [42] and
ShapeNet16 [46]. We adopt PointNet [29], PointNet++ [30] and DGCNN [39] as the basic classifiers. Firstly, com-pared with the existing rotation attack method [51], our pro-posed attack achieves a higher attack success rate. Then, compared with existing rotation robust classifiers, our best model (ART-DGCNN) shows a more robust performance on randomly rotated datasets. Meanwhile, our methods generally show less accuracy reduction on clean aligned datasets. Beyond arbitrary rotations, the resulting models also show a solid defense against adversarial rotations.1 Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• For the first time, we successfully improve the rotation robustness of point cloud classifiers from the perspec-tive of model attack and defense. Our proposed frame-work, ART-Point, enjoys fewer architectural modifica-tions than previous rotation-equivariant methods and requires no descriptor extractions on input data.
• We propose an axis-wise rotation attack algorithm to efficiently find the most aggressive rotated samples for adversarial training. A rotation pool is designed to avoid over-fitting of models on adversarial samples.
We also contribute a fast one-step optimization to solve the min-max problem.
• We validate our method on two datasets with three point cloud classifiers. The results show that our at-tack algorithm achieves a higher attack success rate than existing methods. Moreover, the proposed ART-Point framework can effectively improve model rota-tion robustness allowing the model to defend against both arbitrary and adversarial rotations, while hardly affecting model performance on clean data. 2.