Abstract
Training a generalizable 3D part segmentation network is quite challenging but of great importance in real-world applications. To tackle this problem, some works design task-specific solutions by translating human understanding of the task to machine’s learning process, which faces the risk of missing the optimal strategy since machines do not necessarily understand in the exact human way.
Others try to use conventional task-agnostic approaches designed for domain generalization problems with no task prior knowledge considered. To solve the above issues, we propose AutoGPart, a generic method enabling training generalizable 3D part segmentation networks with the task prior considered. AutoGPart builds a supervision space with geometric prior knowledge encoded, and lets the machine to search for the optimal supervisions from the space for a specific segmentation task automatically.
Extensive experiments on three generalizable 3D part segmentation tasks are conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness and versatility of AutoGPart. We demonstrate that the performance of segmentation networks using simple backbones can be significantly improved when trained with supervisions searched by our method. 1.

Introduction into parts a deeper for
Humans parse objects functionality, mobility as understanding of semantics, well as the fabrication process.
It is natural to consider equipping machines with such part-level understanding.
Over the past few years, there has been an increasing interest in 3D part segmentation tasks to support various applications [14, 23, 32, 46] in vision, graphics, and robotics. Thanks to the availability of large-scale 3D part datasets [32, 48] and the development of 3D deep learning techniques, these methods achieve impressive part segmentation results when a test shape comes from the same distribution as the training set. However, they usually
Figure 1. AutoGPart automatically finds real part cues for different segmentation tasks and supports simple point cloud processing backbones (e.g. PointNet++ [35]) to successfully parse shapes from novel categories. suffer from a huge performance drop when it comes to parsing 3D shapes from a novel distribution, e.g. from a different semantic category.
In this work, we focus on generalizable 3D part segmentation tasks. The goal is to learn the essence of parts on some training sets and to be able to generalize well to shapes from novel distributions. A main challenge comes from the versatile cues defining parts. Shape parts can be defined via many cues like geometric primitive fitting [14, 23, 46], rigid motions [12, 13, 47], and semantic prior [27, 29, 32]. The same shape can be segmented into different parts based upon different cues for the seek of various applications. Therefore for a specific application, other than understanding input shapes, a network also needs to figure out the exact cues defining parts from the training data. This is where it becomes tricky. Some of these cues are more salient than others, making them easier to be captured. When these cues heavily correlate with the real part cue in the training domain, they could easily become shortcut features [7,8,15] biasing the network and hindering the generalizability, as observed in [29].
To the above cope with existing works usually focus on a specific type of parts and incorporate part-type priors towards generalizable 3D part segmentation. For example, a modularized design has been adopted to explicitly extract motion flow and the rigid challenges,
motion of local patches so that generalizable motion-based part segmentation can be achieved in [47].
Similarly, the networks are guided explicitly to extract primitive parameters in order to segment primitive parts in [23, 46]. type priors requires a deep
Finding such explicit part understanding of the target task, which might not always be available. Even after a huge amount of trail-and-errors in expert designs, such approaches are still not guaranteed to fully grasp the essence of parts. This is because human understandings might not align well with the way that machines prefer to follow [6, 18, 52]. studies generic domain
Another line of works from the machine learning community generalization algorithms to help a network handle out-of-distribution samples. However, without considering any geometric prior which is important for part segmentation tasks, they fail to improve crucial parts of the model but merely focus on generic regularization strategies such as making gradients from multiple domains consistent with each other [30].
In contrast, we present AutoGPart, a generalizable 3D part segmentation technique that could be applied to any type of 3D parts. Our key observation is that the generalizability of a 3D part segmentation network is largely hindered by shortcut features [7]. These shortcut features tend to be quite salient and closely correlated with segmentation labels in some training domains. Through finding proper intermediate supervisions that are more closely related with real part cues and loosely correlated with shortcut features, we can downweight the influence of shortcut features by jointly training the network with segmentation and the intermediate supervisions. of are that these possible to depict part-aware intermediate supervisions
We design a parametric model the distribution supervisions.
And we inject geometric priors in the model space such and geometrically-discriminative.
In addition, we present an automatic way for optimizing the distribution of these supervisions for a supervised part segmentation network. A beam search-like strategy is then applied to greedily generate some suitable supervisions from the distribution. With the additional supervision, task-specific part cues can be automatically discovered without experts’
Comprehensive experiments on three trail-and-errors. generalizable 3D part segmentation tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of AutoGPart, including 4.4% absolute
Segmentation Mean IoU improvement on mobility-based part segmentation , 4.2% on primitive fitting and 0.7% absolute Mean Recall [29] improvement on semantic-based part segmentation.
To summarize, our contributions are threefold: 1) We present a generic method to improve the generalizability of 3D part segmentation networks via automatically discovered intermediate supervisions and the method is 2) We design suitable for different part definitions. a parametric model to depict the distribution of useful intermediate supervisions with geometric prior encoded. 3)
We propose an automatic search algorithm to find the proper intermediate supervision given a specific part segmentation task. 2.