Abstract
Evaluation measures have a crucial impact on the direc-tion of research. Therefore, it is of utmost importance to develop appropriate and reliable evaluation measures for new applications where conventional measures are not well suited. Video Moment Retrieval (VMR) is one such applica-tion, and the current practice is to use R@K, θ for evaluat-ing VMR systems. However, this measure has two disadvan-tages. First, it is rank-insensitive: It ignores the rank posi-tions of successfully localised moments in the top-K ranked list by treating the list as a set. Second, it binarizes the In-tersection over Union (IoU) of each retrieved video moment using the threshold θ and thereby ignoring fine-grained lo-calisation quality of ranked moments.
We propose an alternative measure for evaluating VMR, called Average Max IoU (AxIoU), which is free from the above two problems. We show that AxIoU satisfies two important axioms for VMR evaluation, namely, Invariance against Redundant Moments and Monotonicity with re-spect to the Best Moment, and also that R@K, θ satisfies the first axiom only. We also empirically examine how Ax-IoU agrees with R@K, θ, as well as its stability with respect to change in the test data and human-annotated temporal boundaries. 1.

Introduction
Video Moment Retrieval (VMR) has been explored to find relevant fragments of videos (i.e. video moments) based on a user’s textual query [10, 15]. Most existing
VMR systems [10, 22, 38, 39, 42] cast the problem of find-ing video moments into a ranking problem. For evaluating ranked lists of video moments, R@K, θ is widely adopted in the literature [10]. R@K, θ for a query q is defined as 1 if at least one relevant video moment in the top K of the ranked list has an Intersection over Union (IoU) larger than
θ with the ground truth for q.
R@K, θ has two disadvantages as illustrated in Figure 1.
Figure 1. The system on the left shows a moment with a large overlap with the ground truth (blue band) in the top of the ranked list, and the system on the right illustrates a moment with a much smaller overlap with the ground truth at rank 4. According to
R@5, 0.5, the two systems are equally effective. We propose Ax-IoU whose measurements reflect the localisation quality (i.e. IoU) and the rank of successfully retrieved video moments. The photo in the figure is taken from Charades-STA [10].
First, it is rank-insensitive, as the video moments in the top-K ranked list are treated as a set, and their ranks are not considered. Second, it is localisation-insensitive, i.e., the exact position (start and end points) of the video moment does not affect the measurement as it binarizes the IoU of each video moment using threshold θ. Thus, R@K, θ only provides a binary measurement for a ranked list in an all-or-nothing manner, ignoring the ranking and localisation qual-ity of top-K predicted video moments. As we shall demon-strate in this paper, these properties of R@K, θ are prob-lematic for reliable evaluation. R@K, θ cannot distinguish ranked lists with different quality due to the binary property, while leading to instability under a small number of evalua-tion samples and label ambiguity [2, 15, 26, 35]. Moreover,
R@K, θ evaluates rather different aspects of system qual-ity depending on a parameter setting and can conflict with each other; for example, a ranked list whose second mo-ment achieves IoU = 0.71 is measured to be 1.0 in terms of
R@2, 0.7 but to be 0.0 in terms of R@1, 0.7 when the first moment has IoU = 0.69. These undesirable properties of
R@K, θ should be carefully considered for future studies because conclusions drawn from potentially unstable mea-sures may not generalise well. In practice, the instability of
R@K, θ implies that we may underestimate a VMR method by adopting a non-best model based on validation R@K, θ.
In this paper, we propose an alternative measure for evaluating VMR systems, called Average Max IoU (Ax-IoU), which does not suffer from the problems above with
R@K, θ. To evaluate evaluation measures, we take an ax-iomatic approach [3, 9, 33, 34] and introduce two impor-tant axioms that an effectiveness measure for VMR must satisfy, namely, invariance against redundant moments and monotonicity with respect to the best moment. We show that R@K, θ only satisfies the first axiom. We also empiri-cally investigate the properties of AxIoU in practical terms, namely, agreement with conventional R@K, θ and the sta-bility to the size of a dataset and label ambiguity. 2.