Abstract
Coordinate-based networks have emerged as a powerful tool for 3D representation and scene reconstruction. These networks are trained to map continuous input coordinates to the value of a signal at each point. Still, current ar-chitectures are black boxes: their spectral characteristics cannot be easily analyzed, and their behavior at unsuper-vised points is difficult to predict. Moreover, these networks are typically trained to represent a signal at a single scale, so naive downsampling or upsampling results in artifacts.
We introduce band-limited coordinate networks (BACON), a network architecture with an analytical Fourier spectrum.
BACON has constrained behavior at unsupervised points, can be designed based on the spectral characteristics of the represented signal, and can represent signals at multiple scales without per-scale supervision. We demonstrate BA-CON for multiscale neural representation of images, radi-ance fields, and 3D scenes using signed distance functions and show that it outperforms conventional single-scale co-ordinate networks in terms of interpretability and quality. 1.

Introduction
Coordinate networks are an emerging class of neural net-works that can be used to represent or optimize a broad for-mat of signals including images, video, 3D models, audio waveforms, and more [41, 44, 52, 64, 66]. As opposed to storing discrete samples of signals in conventional array-or grid-based formats, neural representations approximate signals using a continuous function that is embedded in the learned weights of a fully-connected neural network. Given an input coordinate, these networks are trained to output the value of a signal at that point. Since even complex or high-dimensional signals can be flexibly optimized using a coordinate network, they have become popular for applica-tions including view synthesis [44], image processing [60], 3D reconstruction [52], and neural rendering [70].
Yet, current coordinate networks are black box models that are designed to represent signals at a single scale. As a
Overview of band-limited coordinate networks
Figure 1. (a) The proposed architecture produces intermediate (BACON). outputs with an analytical spectral bandwidth that can be specified at initialization. When supervised on a high-resolution signal, the network learns a multi-resolution decomposition of the output, as shown for fitting 3D shapes via a signed distance function (b) and radiance fields (c). The network is characterized entirely by its
Fourier spectrum (see insets) so its behavior is constrained, even at unsupervised locations. result, the behavior of the network at unsupervised coordi-nates is difficult to predict, with complex dependencies on hyperparameters such as hidden layer size, network depth, or input coordinate encoding. The black box nature of the architecture similarly inhibits multiscale signal representa-tion, since we cannot readily filter or anti-alias these mod-els, and the frequency spectrum of a coordinate network is
difficult to analyze. Thus naive downsampling or upsam-pling by querying the network on a coarser or finer grid of coordinates leads to aliasing or undesired high-frequency artifacts. Ultimately, these characteristics stem from the fact that coordinate networks are not amenable to Fourier analysis and are not designed to be scale aware.
Still, being able to represent and optimize signals at mul-tiple resolutions is an important requirement for many ap-plications. For example in image processing, many tech-niques rely on image pyramids [62] (e.g., optical flow esti-mation, compression, filtering, etc.). Representing 3D ob-jects or scenes at multiple levels of detail is useful for speed-ing up rendering and reducing memory requirements (e.g., mipmapping).
In this work, we introduce band-limited coordinate net-works (BACON). The key properties of this architecture are that (1) the maximum frequency at each layer can be manip-ulated analytically, and (2) the behavior of a trained network is entirely characterized by its Fourier spectrum. BACON is suited to multiscale signal representation because band-limited output layers can be designed with an inductive bias towards a particular resolution or scale.
In addition to introducing BACON, we demonstrate a va-riety of applications including multiscale representation of images, neural radiance fields, and 3D scenes. Our work takes important steps towards making coordinate-based net-works scale aware, and provides a new representation with interpretable behavior. Specifically, we make the following contributions:
• We introduce band-limited coordinate-based networks for representing and optimizing signals.
• We develop methods for spectral analysis of the archi-tecture, and propose a principled, band-limited initial-ization scheme.
• We demonstrate that our architecture outperforms con-ventional single-scale coordinate networks for multi-scale image fitting, neural rendering, and 3D scene rep-resentation. 2.