Abstract
Shape matching has been a long-studied problem for the computer graphics and vision community. The objective is to predict a dense correspondence between meshes that have a certain degree of deformation. Existing methods ei-ther consider the local description of sampled points or dis-cover correspondences based on global shape information.
In this work, we investigate a hierarchical learning design, to which we incorporate local patch-level information and global shape-level structures. This flexible representation enables correspondence prediction and provides rich fea-tures for the matching stage. Finally, we propose a novel optimal transport solver by recurrently updating features on non-confident nodes to learn globally consistent correspon-dences between the shapes. Our results on publicly avail-able datasets suggest robust performance in presence of se-vere deformations without the need of extensive training or refinement. 1.

Introduction
Deformable surfaces have been studied extensively by both computer graphics and computer vision communities.
Dense correspondence estimation is closely linked to ap-plications such as reconstruction and human pose estima-tion. In a standard formulation, we want to find a function f : G → H where f is a mapping from a shape G to an-other shape H. A shape is usually discretized in a triangle mesh that can be expressed in the form of a graph G = (V, E) constituted by vertices V with associated 3D coor-dinates and edges E.Among the most successful optimiza-tion methods to find correspondences between deformable shapes, there is the Functional Map framework [41]. The pointwise correspondence between two shapes is expressed
* The authors contributed equally to this paper
Code: https://github.com/mahdi-slh/BendingGraphs
Figure 1. We process deformable shape pairs by two levels of hier-archy, local graphs and shape graphs. Such hierarchical structure offers a flexible and holistic shape representation that enables cor-respondence matching and provides rich features for an optimal transport matching stage. as a linear map between the functional bases (i.e. eigen-functions of the Laplace Beltrami Operator) defined on the shapes.
As a first work to pair the functional map framework with deep neural networks on deformable shapes, deep functional maps [32] present a pipeline to seek a corre-spondence using as input SHOT [60] handcrafted descrip-tors on sampled points. Despite building on top of point cloud features, FMNet [32] finds correspondences densely on deformable shapes. Recent works [22, 61] also use learned point cloud features [59] to describe local regions.
Other methods also suggest integrating spectral manifold wavelets [26] or iterative spectral upsampling into func-tional maps [37]. While these methods investigate dense correspondences, many require numerous initial keypoints or are sensitive to initial sparse matches.
Though meshes are commonly represented and stored as undirected lattice graphs, limited works explore graph deep learning frameworks to extract features from meshes [21, 39, 64]. Litany et al. use graph convolutional auto-encoders for the task of shape completion and Zhou et al. use graphs for image-based deformable matching. Graph neural networks (GNNs) are successfully applied to point clouds [31,54,58,68] across many tasks. This work presents a graph-based descriptor designed for meshes, capturing lo-cal surface structures by constructing edges given a mesh lattice graph. GNNs on meshes are a discretization of spec-tral convolutions on manifold representations [7] and there-fore constitute a powerful tool to capture local deforma-tions.
Moreover, GNNs have proven to be a great framework to construct hierarchical representations [9, 12, 18, 66, 69, 72].
During recent years GNNs have been used in many com-puter vision tasks, from scene graph generation [18] to holistic representation learning [76], enabling relationship definition [29] and information exchange and propaga-tion [69, 70]. Here we incorporate a high-level shape graph to represent and interconnect shape regions, as shown in fig-ure 1. Each shape region describes the surrounding geom-etry by the local graph. Using such hierarchical graphs, we can process 3D meshes efficiently and learn a rich holistic shape representation, which is able to capture local details and capture neighbor geometry information.
We address the problem of 3D deformable shape match-ing as an optimal transport problem. As a classic problem, optimal transport is gaining popularity in the fields of fea-ture matching and registration [43, 47, 55, 73], where dif-ferentiable Sinkhorn algorithm [42, 55, 73] performs well with learning-based feature matching [10]. The Sinkhorn solver favors putative correspondences by iteratively apply-ing softmax and does not work well in soft correspondence problems or when an exact matching is missing. The coarse deformable setting with sampled graph seeds does not guar-antee putative hard matches. To deal with such an issue, we propose a new strategy using Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs) to propagate features using matching confidence in our shape graph leading to a more robust optimal transport solution.
In summary, our contributions are as follows: 2.