Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel semi-supervised learn-ing (SSL) framework named BoostMIS that combines adap-tive pseudo labeling and informative active annotation to unleash the potential of medical image SSL models: (1)
BoostMIS can adaptively leverage the cluster assumption and consistency regularization of the unlabeled data ac-cording to the current learning status. This strategy can adaptively generate one-hot “hard” labels converted from task model predictions for better task model training. (2)
For the unselected unlabeled images with low confidence, we introduce an Active learning (AL) algorithm to find the informative samples as the annotation candidates by exploiting virtual adversarial perturbation and model’s density-aware entropy. These informative candidates are subsequently fed into the next training cycle for better SSL label propagation. Notably, the adaptive pseudo-labeling and informative active annotation form a learning closed-loop that are mutually collaborative to boost medical im-age SSL. To verify the effectiveness of the proposed method, we collected a metastatic epidural spinal cord compression (MESCC) dataset that aims to optimize MESCC diagno-sis and classification for improved specialist referral and treatment. We conducted an extensive experimental study of BoostMIS on MESCC dataset. The experimental results verify our framework’s effectiveness with a significant im-provement over various state-of-the-art methods. Our work will be available at github 1. 1.

Introduction
In recent years, the development of deep learning brings prosperity to the field of computer vision [26, 27, 29, 29, 30, 32, 54, 57–59] and applied in industrial application [22, 28, 1https://github.com/wannature/BoostMIS
* Corresponding Author.
Figure 1. An example of how does AL facilitates medical image
SSL. Orange and green dots represent two different classes in the data pool. Grey dots represent the unlabeled data. Red and blue marks indicate the annotation candidates, which can smooth the decision boundary and propagate representative label information to unlabeled data, respectively. 31,46,52,56]. For instance, a significant trend in healthcare is to leverage the sizable well-annotated dataset using deep learning technology [7, 19, 40, 49, 55, 62] to achieve auto-mated medical image analysis. However, annotating such a medical dataset is an expert-oriented, expensive, and time-consuming task. The situation is further exacerbated by large numbers of new raw medical images without labels.
These are generated on a daily basis in clinical practice and there is an increasing demand for the exploitation of such data. Therefore, semi-supervised learning (SSL) that goes beyond traditional supervised learning by exploiting a lim-ited amount of labeled data together with a huge amount of raw unlabeled data is gaining traction. Among the ex-isting SSL methods, pseudo-labeling [25] is a specific vari-ant where model predictions are converted to pseudo-labels, which is often used along with confidence-based threshold-ing that retains unlabeled examples only when the classifier is sufficiently confident. Some of them [4, 24, 42, 50], have 1
achieved great success on image classification datasets such as CIFAR-10/100 [23], demonstrating the potential value of utilizing unlabeled data. these natural
Unfortunately, image-based pseudo-labeling SSL methods may not satisfactorily resolve the medical imaging problems, which can be summarized as two key aspects: (1) Poor Data Utilization. Medical im-ages (e.g., CT, MRI) are highly similar at the pixel level, making them hard to classify, even by human beings. That is, the pseudo-labeling may only produce a few pseudo-labels with high confidence above a fixed threshold for un-labeled medical images, especially at the early stage of the training process. It suffers from the poor utilization of data problem that is a considerable amount of unlabeled data (2) Missing Informative Sample. The ig-are ignored. nored unlabeled data with prediction confidence below the pre-defined threshold may have informative data (e.g., sam-ples near the boundary of clusters, representative samples in the unlabeled distribution space) that can further improve the model’s performance. Based on the aforementioned in-sights, a meaningful optimization goal of Medical Image
SSL is to explore an effective learning approach to tap onto unlabeled medical data deeply.
Inspired by another alternative to leverage the unlabeled data, that is active learning (AL) [38], which aims to se-lect the most informative samples to maximize the model performance with minimal labeling cost. AL seems to be a tempting approach to deal with the aforementioned prob-lems in pseudo-labeling SSL methods. As illustrated in
Figure 1, SSL already results in the embodiment of knowl-edge from selected unlabeled data with high confidence by pseudo-labeling. The judicious AL selection can reflect the value of additionally informative samples in unselected data on top of such embodied knowledge. Those informative cases can assist the SSL model to propagate extra valuable knowledge to unlabeled data, thereby improving the unla-beled data utilization for better SSL. In fact, AL and SSL are naturally related with respect to their common goal, i.e., uti-lizing unlabeled samples. From the perspective of machine learning, utilizing the correlation and similarity among re-lated learning methods can be regarded as a form of induc-tive transfer. It can introduce the inductive bias [3] to make the combined learning method prefer the correct hypothesis, thereby improving the performance.
Overall, we propose a novel framework BoostMIS that aims to boost medical image SSL, which comprises the fol-lowing parts: (1) Medical Image Task Model. The task model (medical image classification in this paper) is first trained through weakly-augmented medical images with (2) Consistency-based Adaptive Label supervised labels.
Propagator. This module propagates the label information for unlabeled data using both pseudo-labeling and consis-tency regularization. Since the learning ability and perfor-2 mance of the models are different in each training stage, we define a dynamically adaptive threshold based on the current learning status to produce pseudo-labels for better unlabeled data utilization. Then the consistency regular-ization forces the model to produce the same prediction of weakly-augmented and strongly-augmented data as the reg-ularization criterion for better generalization capacity. (3)
Adversarial Unstability Selector. To boost SSL by AL, we introduce the virtual adversarial perturbation to choose the unstable samples that lying on the clusters’ boundaries as annotation candidates. Specifically, the SSL model would be weaker or even inconsistent on the clusters’ boundaries, the adversarial unstability selector could identify samples near the boundaries by measuring the inconsistency be-tween samples and the corresponding virtual adversarial ex-amples. (4) Balanced Uncertainty Selector. To further iden-tify the informative cases in the unlabeled pool, we use the density-aware entropy of the SSL model to evenly select the samples with high uncertainty in each predicted class as the complementary set to balance the subsequent training .
The union of adversarial unstability samples and balanced uncertainty samples will be the final annotation candidates to expand the labeled pool. In summary, our proposed four modules work in a loop and make progress together to boost the medical image SSL.
To summarize, the major contributions of our paper are as follows:
• To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to incor-porate AL into SSL to unleash the potential of unla-beled data for better medical image analysis.
• We propose adaptive pseudo-labeling and informative active annotation that reasonably leverage the unla-beled medical images and form a closed-loop structure to boost the medical image SSL.
• We collected a metastatic epidural spinal cord com-pression (MESCC) dataset for method development and extensive evaluation, which aims to optimize
MESCC diagnosis and classification for improved spe-cialist referral and treatment.
• The consistent superiority of the proposed BoostMIS is demonstrated on the MESCC dataset that outper-forms existing SSL methods by a large margin. 2.