Abstract
While neural representations for static 3D shapes are widely studied, representations for deformable surfaces are limited to be template-dependent or to lack efficiency.
We introduce Canonical Deformation Coordinate Space (CaDeX), a unified representation of both shape and non-rigid motion. Our key insight is the factorization of the de-formation between frames by continuous bijective canon-ical maps (homeomorphisms) and their inverses that go through a learned canonical shape. Our novel deforma-tion representation and its implementation are simple, ef-ficient, and guarantee cycle consistency, topology preser-vation, and, if needed, volume conservation. Our mod-elling of the learned canonical shapes provides a flexible and stable space for shape prior learning. We demonstrate state-of-the-art performance in modelling a wide range of deformable geometries: human bodies, animal bodies, and articulated objects. 1 1.

Introduction
Humans perceive, interact, and learn in a continuously changing real world. One of our key perceptual capabil-ities is the modeling of a dynamic 3D world. Such geo-metric intelligence requires sufficiently general neural rep-resentations that can model different dynamic geometries in 4D sequences to facilitate solving robotics [55], com-puter vision [29], and graphics [44] tasks. Unlike the widely studied 3D neural representations, a dynamic representa-1https://www.cis.upenn.edu/˜leijh/projects/cadex tion has to be able to associate (for example, finding corre-spondence) and aggregate (for example, reconstruction and texturing) information across the deformation states of the world. Directly extending a successful static 3D represen-tation (for example, [33]) to each deformed frame leads to low efficiency [36], and the inability to model the infor-mation flow across frames, which is critical when solving ill-posed problems as in [44]. Our desired dynamic rep-resentation needs to simultaneously represent a global sur-face (canonical/reference shape) across all frames and the consistent deformation (correspondence/flow/motion) be-tween any frame pair (Fig. 1), so that we can recover the dy-namic geometry by reconstructing only one reference sur-face and generating the rest of the deformed surfaces by us-ing the consistent deformation representation as well as as-sociate and aggregate information across frames (Fig. 2A).
The majority of dynamic representations that satisfy the above desired properties are model-based and rely on para-metric models for specific categories like human bodies [1, 31] (Fig. 2B), faces [4, 30], or hands [47]. On the contrary, recent model-free methods like the implicit flow [36, 50] (Fig. 2C) apply one universal 4D representation but model the canonical shape in an ad hoc chosen frame [36, 50] that complicates the shape prior. Alternatively, the choice of an approximate mean/neutral shape [58] as the canonical shape can limit the shape expressibility. Modeling of the defor-mation is done by either MLPs [50, 58] that ignore the real world deformation properties, or by ODEs [36] that are in-efficient for space deformation, or by an optimized embed-ded graph [6] or Atlas [2] that are sequence specific.
In this work, we introduce a novel and general archi-tecture and representation that enable a competitive re-construction of every frame and the recovery of consis-tent correspondence across frames. Our approach is rooted in the factorization of deformation (Sec. 3.1).
If we as-sume that the topology does not change during deformation, all deformed surfaces of one instance can be regarded as equivalent through continuous bijective mappings (home-omorphisms). This allows us to factorize the deforma-tion between two frames by the composition of two con-tinuous invertible functions such that one maps the source frame into a common 3D Canonical Deformation Coordi-nate Space (CaDeX) while another maps it back to the des-tination frame. Such a factorization and its implementa-tion (Sec. 3.2) is novel, simple, and efficient (compared to
ODEs [36]) while it guarantees cycle consistency, topol-ogy preservation, and, if necessary, volume conservation (Sec.3.3). The canonical shape embedded in the CaDeX can be regarded as the representative element, while the associated invertible mappings that transform between de-formed frames and the CaDeX are the canonical maps.
Therefore, we model the reference surface directly in the
CaDeX via an implicit field [33] (Sec. 3.4), which can be optimized together with the canonical maps during training.
In summary, our main contributions are: (1) A novel general representation and architecture for dynamic sur-faces that jointly solve the canonical shape and consistent deformation problems. (2) Learnable continuous bijective canonical maps and canonical shapes that jointly factorize the shape deformation, and are novel, simple, efficient, and guarantee cycle consistency and topology preservation. (3)
A novel solution to the dynamic surface reconstruction and correspondence tasks given sparse point clouds or depth views based on the proposed representation. (4) We demon-strate state-of-the-art performance on modelling different deformable categories: Human bodies [5], Animals [57] and Articulated Objects [53]. 2.