Abstract
Human-Object Interactions (HOI) detection, which aims to localize a human and a relevant object while recogniz-ing their interaction, is crucial for understanding a still im-age. Recently, tranformer-based models have significantly advanced the progress of HOI detection. However, the ca-pability of these models has not been fully explored since the Object Query of the model is always simply initialized as just zeros, which would affect the performance. In this paper, we try to study the issue of promoting transformer-based HOI detectors by initializing the Object Query with category-aware semantic information. To this end, we in-novatively propose the Category-Aware Transformer Net-work (CATN). Specifically, the Object Query would be ini-tialized via category priors represented by an external ob-ject detection model to yield a better performance. More-over, such category priors can be further used for enhanc-ing the representation ability of features via the attention mechanism. We have firstly verified our idea via the Or-acle experiment by initializing the Object Query with the groundtruth category information. And then extensive ex-periments have been conducted to show that a HOI detec-tion model equipped with our idea outperforms the baseline by a large margin to achieve a new state-of-the-art result. 1.

Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection, serving as a fundamental task for high-level computer vision tasks, e.g. image captioning, visual grounding, visual question answer, etc., has attracted enormous attention in recent years. Given an image, HOI detection aims to localize the pair of human and object instances and recognize the interaction between them. A human-object interaction could be defined as the
<human, object, verb> triplet.
Many two- or one-stage methods [2, 6, 7, 12, 13, 17, 18, 20, 26, 34, 35, 38] have significantly advanced the process
* Corresponding author.
Figure 1. Black-Dotted-Box in (a) and Black-Curve in (b): The
Object Query of the first decoder layer is simply initialized as just zeros in all previous transformer-based HOI detection meth-ods. Red-Box in (a) and Red-Curve in (b): Our idea is to take the category-aware information as the Object Query initialization, where the training curve indicates that our method significantly promotes mAP from 29.07 to 31.03 on the HICO-DET dataset. of HOI detection, while transformer-based methods [3, 14, 19, 30, 36, 39] have been remarkably proposed recently and achieved the new state-of-the-art result.
Thanks to the self-attention and cross-attention mecha-nisms, Transformer [32] has a better capability of capturing long-range dependence between different instances, which is especially suitable for the HOI detection. HOTR [14] and
AS-Net [3] utilize two parallel branches with transformer-decoders for performing instance detection and interaction classification respectively. Motivated by DETR [1], HOI-Transformer [39] and QPIC [30] adopt one transformer-decoder with several sequential layers and automatically group the different types of predictions from one query into an HOI triplet in an end-to-end manner.
Though these transformer-based methods have greatly promoted the community by improving the performance and efficiency without complex grouping strategies, there is a common issue with the Object Query† regardless of
Specifically, the Ob-the differences in these methods. ject Query of the first decoder layer of these methods is always simply initialized as zeros since there is no previ-ous layer for feeding semantic features (shown as Black-Dotted-Box in Figure 1(a)). The capability of these mod-els has not been fully explored due to the simple initial-ization of the Object Query, which would affect the per-formance. Meanwhile, multi-modal information, including spatial [2], posture [5], and language [37], has been indi-cated to be beneficial for two-stage HOI detection models.
Thus, one question remains: how semantic information promotes a transformer-based HOI detection model? In this paper, we try to study the issue of elevating transformer-based HOI detectors by initializing the Object Query with category-aware semantic information.
To this end, we present the Category-Aware Transformer
Network (CATN), consisting of two modules: the Category
Aware Module (CAM) and the Category-Level Attention
Module (CLAM). CAM can obtain category priors which is then applied to the initialization of the Object Query.
Specifically, we use an external object detector and design a select strategy to get the categories contained in the image.
After that, these categories would be transferred to corre-sponding word embeddings as final category priors. More-over, these priors could be further used for enhancing the representation ability of features via the proposed CLAM.
We first show that category-aware semantic informa-tion can indeed promote a transformer-based HOI detection model by the Oracle Experiment where the category priors are generated from the ground truth. Then we evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed CATN on two widely used
HOI benchmarks: HICO-DET and V-COCO datasets. The contributions of our work could be summarized as:
• We reveal that a transformer-based HOI model can be further improved by taking category-aware semantic information as the initialization of the Object Query to achieve a new state-of-the-art result.
• We present the Category-Aware Transformer Network (CATN), which obtains two modules: CAM for gener-ating category priors of an image and CLAM for en-hancing the representation ability of the features.
• Extensive experiments, involving discussions of differ-ent initialization types and where to leverage the se-mantic information, have been conducted to demon-strate the effectiveness of the proposed idea.
†The Object Query is one input of the transformer-decoder and contains
Nq object queries without query positional embedding in this paper. 2.