Abstract
In this paper, we explore a new type of extrinsic method to directly align two geometric shapes with point-to-point correspondences in ambient space by recovering a defor-mation, which allows more continuous and smooth maps to be obtained. Speciﬁcally, the classic coherent point drift is revisited and generalizations have been proposed. First, by observing that the deformation model is essentially deﬁned with respect to Euclidean space, we generalize the kernel method to non-Euclidean domains. This generally leads to better results for processing shapes, which are known as two-dimensional manifolds. Second, a generalized proba-bilistic model is proposed to address the sensibility of co-herent point drift method to local optima. Instead of directly optimizing over the objective of coherent point drift, the new model allows to focus on a group of most conﬁdent ones, thus improves the robustness of the registration system. Ex-periments are conducted on multiple public datasets with comparison to state-of-the-art competitors, demonstrating the superiority of our method which is both ﬂexible and efﬁ-cient to improve the matching accuracy due to our extrinsic alignment objective in ambient space. 1.

Introduction
Non-rigid shape matching lies at the core of many ap-plications in computer vision and graphics, ranging from statistical shape analysis, information and style transfer to the generation of new shapes among others [68]. Unlike the rigid counterpart, non-rigid shape matching is much more intractable since the matching cannot be exactly modeled by a small number of parameters. As a result, matching extrin-sically by determining the deformation in ambient space, i.e. 3D Euclidean space, is deemed as a very difﬁcult task and most attention has been given to intrinsic methods.
The group of intrinsic methods is favorable for match-ing shapes involving complex motions because the intrin-∗Corresponding author
Figure 1. A demonstration of our method. The ﬁrst and second shapes are a matching pair produced by MWP [34], where the result is presented by color transfer (unmatched point in white).
Given the imperfect result, our method proceeds by robustly esti-mating a transformation from the ﬁrst to the second shape, which results in the third transformed shape. The reﬁned matching result is manifested in the fourth shape (in comparison to the ﬁrst). sic properties or features are invariant to extrinsic changes.
In particular, a prominent strategy is to exploit the spec-tral quantities using eigen-decomposition of the Laplace-Beltrami operator [61], which is in theory invariant to iso-metric shape deformations. The strategy has proven to be very effective, represented by the framework of func-tional maps [52] and its numerous follow-up works in recent years [46, 56, 58]. In essence, these methods are to ﬁnd a well-deﬁned feature space to represent each point in shape, so that Euclidean metrics can be used to establish corre-spondences or maps. However, some fundamental prob-lems exist in this category. The maps recovered in feature space normally do not have the properties such as continu-ity or smoothness. Moreover, the transformation of points inevitably means loss of information which inherently pro-hibits accurate alignment at ﬁne scales, especially in less prominent areas such as ﬂat regions.
In contrast, extrinsic methods have the potential advan-tages to preserve the desired properties of maps and obtain more accurate alignment, since the objective is based on ambient space. Efforts in this line of work are relatively less compared to the intrinsic methods. In particular, the classic coherent point drift (CPD) [51] and its extended variants [4, 31], deformation based on vector ﬁeld ﬂow [15] and divergence-free ﬁeld [19] have been proposed in recent years. However, their performances are restricted due to some commonly-known major obstacles. To begin with,
the deformation which requires a high degree of freedom is hard to model in an efﬁcient way. In addition, the opti-mization can easily get stuck in local optima because of the complexity of deformation.
Our method belongs to the category of extrinsic meth-ods, although intrinsic information may be utilized for op-timal performance as input. Our method is both a revisit and a generalization of the classic CPD. The generalization mainly includes two aspects to address the weaknesses of
CPD which prevent it from application to general-purpose shape matching. The ﬁrst aspect is regarding the deforma-tion model. In CPD, a regularized functional framework is utilized, in which the solution is established as a use of the kernel trick. In this paper, we further analyze the direction and generalize the original framework based on Euclidean space to non-Euclidean domains. We show that the ker-nel method can be extended for shapes with non-Euclidean structures, by connecting the notion of Laplace operator to a non-Euclidean one, i.e. Laplace-Beltrami operator. We also show that the new deformation model has a more economic and intuitive alternative expression. The second aspect is regarding the intractability of optimizing the objective of
CPD. We observe that this is due to the large search space of the problem. To address this issue, we borrow ideas from the image matching community [26, 44]. In image match-ing tasks, direct matching of two feature sets is intractable, thus a prevalent approach is to ﬁnd the most conﬁdent cor-respondences by nearest-neighbor descriptor matching, and geometric models may be found from the set of initial cor-respondences. To extend the idea to shape matching, we generalize the probabilistic model of CPD to handle such a restrictive set, which also admits a smart and efﬁcient
Expectation-Maximization (EM) method. An exemplary demonstration of our method is presented in Fig. 1.
To summarize, the main contributions of this paper in-clude the following three aspects. First, a generalization of the regularized functional framework of CPD to non-Euclidean domains is proposed. Second, a generalization of the probabilistic model of CPD to handle an arbitrary outlier-contaminated initial conﬁdent correspondence set is presented. Third, by extensive experimental validation on multiple datasets and experimental analyses on different settings, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. 2.