Abstract
Human-Object Interaction detection is a holistic visual recognition task that entails object detection as well as in-teraction classification. Previous works of HOI detection has been addressed by the various compositions of sub-set predictions, e.g., Image → HO → I, Image → HI →
O. Recently, transformer based architecture for HOI has emerged, which directly predicts the HOI triplets in an end-to-end fashion (Image → HOI). Motivated by various in-ference paths for HOI detection, we propose cross-path consistency learning (CPC), which is a novel end-to-end learning strategy to improve HOI detection for transform-ers by leveraging augmented decoding paths. CPC learning enforces all the possible predictions from permuted infer-ence sequences to be consistent. This simple scheme makes the model learn consistent representations, thereby improv-ing generalization without increasing model capacity. Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, and we achieved significant improvement on V-COCO and
HICO-DET compared to the baseline models. Our code is available at https://github.com/mlvlab/CPChoi. 1.

Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection is a holistic visual recognition task that includes detecting individual objects as <human, object>, while properly classify-ing the type of <interaction>. Previous HOI detec-tors [15, 31, 49, 52] were mainly built on object detection models. They commonly extend CNN-based object detec-tors [34, 42, 45] with an additional head for interaction clas-sification, e.g., humans and objects are detected first, and their interaction is associated subsequently.
To alleviate the high computation cost of such two-stage HOI detection methods, one-stage models [22, 33, 52] have been proposed for faster detection. These mod-els perform interaction prediction and object detection in
*corresponding author. (a) cycle consistency (b) cross-task consistency (c) cross-path consistency
Figure 1. Comparison on the variants of consistencies. The black line refers to the main task function fX Y , and the red, blue lines refer to the pair of tasks trained to be consistent with each other. (a) Cycle consistency enforces the composite function of fYX ◦ fX Y to be consistent with identity function fX X . (b)
Cross-task consistency requires an auxiliary pretrained network fYYa , represented in dashed lines, to give consistent outputs across tasks. (c) Cross-path consistency does not require task-specific pretrained networks. The output of main task function fX Y should be consistent with the composition of the outputs from sub-task functions fX Ys and fYsY ◦ fX Ys . parallel. They compensate for their lower performance with auxiliary predictions for the HOI subsets, i.e., aux-iliary predictions for subset <human, interaction> or <object, interaction> may help HOI predic-tion through post-processing. However, these works de-mand different network architectures for each auxiliary pre-diction, due to strict disciplines for each network’s input.
Hence, to introduce flexibility, transformer-based architec-tures [6, 23, 46, 48] have recently been adopted for HOI de-tection. They reformulate the HOI detection problem as a direct set prediction building on DETR [4].
Motivated by various inference paths in HOI detectors, we propose a simple yet effective method to train HOI trans-formers. We augment the decoding paths with respect to the possible prediction sequences of HOI triplets. Then, with the cascade structure of transformers, an input query is sequentially decoded into auxiliary sub-task outputs and the final output. The stage of each augmented paths stage shares a decoder, in a multi-task learning fashion. We fur-ther improve our method to leverage the augmented decod-ing paths by enforcing the outputs from the various paths to be consistent. Accordingly, we propose Cross-Path
Consistency (CPC) Learning, which aims to predict HOI triplets regardless of inference sequences.
Similar to cross-task consistency [55], cross-path con-sistency retains inference path invariance. However, cross-path consistency learning does not require additional pre-trained networks.
In contrast to cross-task consistency, which demands an auxiliary network to train the main task X → Y (Figure 1-(b)), cross-path consistency de-fines an auxiliary domain Ys in between X and Y (Fig-In other words, the main task X → Y (i.e., ure 1-(c)).
Image→HOI) is divided into subtasks X → Ys and Ys →
Y (e.g., Image→HO→I). The main task function fX Y is then trained by enforcing its output and the composition of sub-task predictions to be consistent. Moreover, cross-path consistency learning is temporarily adopted for train-ing only.
Our training strategy can be generalized to any trans-former based architecture, and can be applied in an end-to-end method. Extensive experiments show that HOI trans-formers trained with CPC learning strategy achieves sub-stantial improvements in two popular HOI detection bench-marks: V-COCO and HICO-DET. The contribution of this work can be summarized as the followings:
• We propose Cross-Path Consistency (CPC) learning, which is a novel end-to-end learning strategy to im-prove transformers for HOI detection leveraging vari-ous inference paths. In this learning scheme, we use
Decoding-Path Augmentation to generate various in-ference paths which are compositions of subtasks with a shared decoder for effective training.
• Our training scheme achieves substantial improve-ments on V-COCO and HICO-DET without increasing model capacity and inference time. 2.