Abstract
Weakly Supervised Object Localization (WSOL) aims to localize objects with image-level supervision. Existing works mainly rely on Class Activation Mapping (CAM) de-rived from a classification model. However, CAM-based methods usually focus on the most discriminative parts of an object (i.e., incomplete localization problem). In this paper, we empirically prove that this problem is associated with the mixup of the activation values between less discrimi-native foreground regions and the background. To address it, we propose Class RE-Activation Mapping (CREAM), a novel clustering-based approach to boost the activation values of the integral object regions. To this end, we in-troduce class-specific foreground and background context embeddings as cluster centroids. A CAM-guided momen-tum preservation strategy is developed to learn the con-text embeddings during training. At the inference stage, the re-activation mapping is formulated as a parameter es-timation problem under Gaussian Mixture Model, which can be solved by deriving an unsupervised Expectation-Maximization based soft-clustering algorithm. By simply integrating CREAM into various WSOL approaches, our method significantly improves their performance. CREAM achieves the state-of-the-art performance on CUB, ILSVRC and OpenImages benchmark datasets. Code will be avail-able at https://github.com/Jazzcharles/CREAM. 1.

Introduction
Weakly Supervised Object Localization (WSOL) aims to localize objects only belonging to one class in each image
*Corresponding author
Figure 1. Histograms of the activation values in CAM and our pro-posed CREAM. The red curves show the IOU between the ground-truth box and the predicted box when τ varies from 0.1 to 0.5. using image-level supervision [6, 33, 34, 38]. WSOL allevi-ates massive efforts in obtaining fine annotations.
Prior works mainly follow the pipeline of training a clas-sification network then deriving the Class Activation Map-ping (CAM) [38] for WSOL. The foreground region is determined by the CAM values larger than the threshold.
However, CAM only highlights the most discriminative re-gions (i.e., incomplete localization). Existing works seek to discover the complete object via adversarial erasing [22,34], spatial regularization [15, 19] or attention mechanism [6].
Most of them still acquire the activation maps via a classi-fication pipeline like CAM to answer “which pixels con-tribute to the class prediction”.
In this paper, we argue that the incomplete localization
problem of CAM is associated with the mixup of the activa-tion values between less discriminative foreground regions and the background. Figure 1 (top) illustrates the distribu-tions of foreground activations (red) and background activa-tions (blue) in CAM. High activations are only dominated by the most discriminative parts (e.g., bird head). In con-trast, numerous low activations belong to both the less dis-criminative parts (e.g., bird body) and the background, mak-ing them hard to distinguish. The mixup activations bring the challenge of balancing the precision and the recall of the foreground region. Specifically, the widely adopted thresh-old τ =0.2 [6, 22, 38] appears too large to completely cover foreground object. Whereas tuning a very small threshold (e.g., τ <0.1) may induce significant false-positive localiza-tions. Moreover, due to mixup activations, a slight change to the threshold leads to a drastic change to the IOU when
τ is small (red curve), and therefore the localization result is sensitive to the threshold. Choe et al. [5] also revealed that a well chosen threshold could lead to a misconception of improvement over CAM. This indicates the infeasibility of improving CAM by simply controlling the threshold.
To address the above challenges, we propose Class RE-Activation Mapping (CREAM), a novel framework for
WSOL. We rethink the WSOL task by answering “whether the pixel is more similar to the foreground or the back-ground”.
In particular, we introduce class-specific fore-ground (background) context embeddings describing the common foreground (background) features. During train-ing, a momentum preservation strategy is developed to up-date the context embeddings under the guidance of CAM.
With abundant context information, the learned embeddings serve as initial foreground (background) cluster centroids for each class. During inference, we cast the re-activation mapping as a parameter estimation problem formulated un-der the Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) framework. We solve it by deriving an Expectation-Maximization (EM) based soft-clustering algorithm. CREAM boosts the acti-vation values of the integral object, eases the foreground-background separation and shows robustness to the thresh-old, as shown in Figure 1 (bottom).
It outperforms prior
WSOL works on CUB, ILSVRC and OpenImages datasets.
To sum up, the contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We propose CREAM, a clustering-based method, to solve the mixup of activations between less discrimina-tive foreground regions and the background by boost-ing the activations of the integral object regions.
• We devise a CAM-guided momentum preservation strategy to learn the class-specific context embed-dings and use them as initial cluster centroids for re-activation mapping.
• We regard re-activation mapping as a parameter esti-mation problem under the GMM framework and solve it by deriving an EM-based soft-clustering algorithm.
• CREAM achieves state-of-the-art localization perfor-mance on CUB, ILSVRC and OpenImages benchmark datasets. It can also serve as a plug-and-play method in a variety of existing WSOL approaches. 2.