Abstract
The classic active contour model raises a great promis-ing solution to polygon-based object extraction with the progress of deep learning recently. Inspired by the physical vibration theory, we propose a contour vibration network (CVNet) for automatic building boundary delineation. Dif-ferent from the previous contour models, the CVNet orig-inally roots in the force and motion principle of contour string. Through the inﬁnitesimal analysis and Newton’s second law, we derive the spatial-temporal contour vibra-tion model of object shapes, which is mathematically re-duced to second-order differential equation. To concretize the dynamic model, we transform the vibration model into the space of image features, and reparameterize the equa-tion coefﬁcients as the learnable state from feature domain.
The contour changes are ﬁnally evolved in a progressive mode through the computation of contour vibration equa-tion. Both the polygon contour evolution and the model optimization are modulated to form a close-looping end-to-end network. Comprehensive experiments on three datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our CVNet over other baselines and state-of-the-art methods for the polygon-based building extraction. The code is available at https://github.com/xzq-njust/CVNet. 1.

Introduction
Automatic building footprint extraction plays an impor-tant role in various higher level geographic and environ-mental applications, such as disaster assessment and rescu-ing [21], 3D-city modeling [13, 23], urban changing detec-tion [27], earth observation and cartography [25] and so on.
Most advanced object extraction methods [11, 26] fall into the category of pixel-wise segmentation, especially when
CNNs have become the cornerstone in the pixel-wise image segmentation. Although the pixel-wise building extraction methods [11,26] generally perform well, most of them often
*The corresponding author. lead to either big inadvertent fusion of adjacent instances or small scattered islands. Moreover, building borders are dif-ﬁcult to delineate with precise structures, and usually com-plex post-processing would be adopted to generate smooth shapes. At the same time, the segmentation methods store their results as raster data, which would result into high-memory requirement and lack the ﬂexibility of distortion and zooming.
Instead, active contour model has the ability to address the aforementioned problems. Give an initialized polygon, a snake [12] would gradually converge to object boundary under the driven of both internal and external energies. To address the initialization and poor convergence to bound-ary concavities, Gradient Vector Flow [29] introduces a new external force for active contours, which can analyze it from a view of force balance though depending on en-ergy functional. To boost the accuracy of building contour detection, recently, the modern CNN-based architectures have also been deployed to extract feature representation of building in [7, 19]. In particular, DSAC [19] integrate the powerful learning network with active contour model, which largely improves border delineation compared to the pixel-wise segmentation. Although a set of priors such as boundary continuity and smoothness may be adopted, self-intersections occur yet because minimizing energy cannot take the sequence of points into account. To overcome self-intersection, DARNet [7] takes polar coordinates to rep-resent active contours, and deforms the contour points to the intersection of boundary and rays in the certain direc-tion. In recent work [9], the authors proposed TDAC based on Level-Set model which estimates contours by pixel-wise prediction like image segmentation. ACDRNet [8] belongs to a general data-driven method that only considers the ﬁ-nal goal of contours matching by directly optimize the ﬁnal object contours and their masks. In contrast to the pixel-wise segmentation, these contour-based methods usually perform better in detecting various building contours, but they are limited in the energy principle of the active con-tour model itself [7, 9, 19], and yet the theory/principle of contour modeling is an open question.
In a new perspective of physical vibration theory, we propose a novel contour vibration network (CVNet) to deal with automatic building boundary delineation. Intuitively, the evolution of object contour is just like the shape vibra-tion (from an initial state to a terminal equilibrium state) of an elastic string (or rubber band) under some forces.
The shape evolution could be modeled with physical mo-tion equation, and the observed texture (or feature) patterns implicitly act one force to push or pull shape points. This case well matches the physical vibration theory, thus we in-troduce and adapt it to active contour model.
Different from the previous contour-based methods [7– 9, 19], the work principle of CVNet conforms to Newton’s second law of motion according to the force analysis of an inﬁnitesimal string. Based on the force and motion princi-ple of string vibration, the motion of contour is connected to internal/external forces of string, which are driven by the characteristics of image/object itself. By performing the in-ﬁnitesimal analysis on the contour string, we build a spatial-temporal contour vibration model, which is mathematically reduced to second-order differential equation. Further, we concretize the vibration model in the space of image fea-tures, and take the reparameterizing trick of the equation co-efﬁcients. Thus the contour vibration equation is dynamic with parameterized coefﬁcients to be learnt from the cur-rent contour state. The contour changes are ﬁnally evolved in a progressive mode through a recursive computation on contour vibration equation. Both the polygon contour evo-lution and the model learning are encapsulated into an end-to-end close-looping network framework. To verify the pro-posed method, we conduct extensive experiments on three building extraction datasets, including Vaihingen [20], Bing
Huts [19] and our built large-scale Inria-building dataset.
The experiments validate the feasibility that takes physical vibration theory for contour extraction, and the experiment results also demonstrate that our CVNet is effective and can achieve the state-of-the-art performance for the polygon-based building contour extraction.
In summary, our main contributions are three folds: i) propose a novel parametric-based ACM, named contour vi-bration model, inspired by the spirit of string vibration the-ory in physics; ii) design contour vibration network to dy-namically evolve shapes based on mechanical equations of motion; iii) experimentally validate the feasibility and ef-fectiveness in the polygon building contour extraction. 2.