Abstract
Curating a large set of fully annotated training data can be costly, especially for the tasks of medical image seg-mentation. Scribble, a weaker form of annotation, is more obtainable in practice, but training segmentation models from limited supervision of scribbles is still challenging.
To address the difﬁculties, we propose a new framework for scribble learning-based medical image segmentation, which is composed of mix augmentation and cycle con-sistency and thus is referred to as CycleMix. For aug-mentation of supervision, CycleMix adopts the mixup strat-egy with a dedicated design of random occlusion, to per-form increments and decrements of scribbles. For regu-larization of supervision, CycleMix intensiﬁes the train-ing objective with consistency losses to penalize incon-sistent segmentation, which results in signiﬁcant improve-ment of segmentation performance. Results on two open datasets, i.e., ACDC and MSCMRseg, showed that the pro-posed method achieved exhilarating performance, demon-strating comparable or even better accuracy than the fully-supervised methods. The code and expert-made scribble an-notations for MSCMRseg are publicly available at https:
//github.com/BWGZK/CycleMix. 1.

Introduction
Large fully-annotated datasets are crucial to the gener-alization ability of deep neural networks. However, the manual labeling of medical images requires great efforts from experienced clinical experts, which is both expen-sive and time-consuming. To alleviate it, existing works have exploited weakly labeled and unlabeled training data to assist model training, such as semi-supervised learning (SSL) [20, 23, 27] and weakly-supervised learning (WSL)
[14, 22, 31]. However, SSL generally requires part of the images in the dataset to be accurately and precisely anno-*Xiahai Zhuang is corresponding author. This work was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 61971142, 62111530195 and 62011540404) and the development fund for Shanghai talents (no. 2020015). (a)
Img 1
Seg 1
Cycle consistency
Mix aug
Mixed seg
Seg mixed (cid:28615)(cid:28633)(cid:28635)(cid:28641)(cid:28633)(cid:28642)(cid:28648)(cid:28643)(cid:28646)
Img 2
Seg 2 (cid:28615)(cid:28633)(cid:28635)(cid:28641)(cid:28633)(cid:28642)(cid:28648)(cid:28643)(cid:28646)
Mixed
:
: Global consistency
: Local consistency (b)
Figure 1. Illustration of CycleMix based on mix augmentation and cycle consistency on scribble training images: (a) shows the oper-ations and results of mixing images and corresponding labels; (b) illustrates the segmentation results for consistency regularization. tated. As an alternative, we propose to investigate a speciﬁc form of WSL approaches, which only utilize scribble anno-tations for model training.
WSL is proposed to exploit weak annotations, such as image-level labels, sparse annotations, and noisy annota-tions [24]. Among them, scribble, as images in Figure. 1 (a) illustrate, is one of the most convenient forms of weak label and has great potential in medical image segmenta-tion [4]. However, due to the lack of supervision, it is still ardours to learn the shape priors of objects, which makes the segmentation of the boundaries particularly difﬁcult.
The existing scribble learning mainly includes two groups. The ﬁrst line of researches leverage a priori as-sumption to expand scribble annotation [24], such as label-ing pixels with similar gray values and similar positions in the same category [13, 19]. However, the process of scrib-ble expansion may generate noisy labels, which deteriorates the segmentation performance of trained models. The sec-1
ond one learns adversarial shape priors, but requires extra fully-annotated masks [18, 28, 35].
There is a line of augmentation strategies, well known as mixup, have been proposed, which focus on generat-ing previously-unseen virtual examples [8, 15, 16, 33, 34].
However, these strategies are proposed for image classiﬁca-tion, and they may change the shape priors of target objects, leading to unrealistic segmentation results for a segmenta-tion task. When only scribble supervision is available, the segmentation performance using mixup augmentation could become even worse and unstable, due to the lack of precise annotations.
To address above mentioned challenges, we propose Cy-cleMix to learn segmentation from scribbles. As illustrated in Figure. 1, CycleMix maximizes supervision of scribbles based on mix augmentation and random occlusion, and reg-ularizes training of models using consistency losses. Firstly, we surmise that a segmentation model should beneﬁt from
ﬁner gradient ﬂow via larger portion of annotated pixels.
Therefore, we propose the two-step mix augmentation strat-egy to augment supervision, including image combination to increase scribbles and random occlusion to reduce scrib-bles. In addition, we develop two-level consistency regular-ization, at both of the global and local levels. The global consistency loss penalizes the inconsistent segmentation of the same image patch in two scenarios, i.e., in the original image and mixed image; while the local consistency loss minimizes the distance between prediction and its largest connected component, exploiting the prior knowledge of anatomy that the target structures are interconnected.
The contributions of this paper are summarized as fol-lows:
• We propose a novel weakly-supervised segmentation framework for scribble supervision, i.e., CycleMix, by integrating mix augmentation of supervision and regu-larization of supervision from consistency, and intro-duce a new scribble annotated cardiac segmentation dataset of MSCMRseg.
• To the best of our knowledge, the proposed CycleMix is the ﬁrst framework to incorporate mixup strategies for augmentation of weakly-supervised segmentation, where one can achieve both increments and decre-ments of scribbles from the mixed training images.
• We propose the consistency losses to regularize the limited supervision from scribbles by penalizing in-consistent segmentation results, at both the global and local levels, which can lead to profound improvement of model performance.
• CycleMix has been evaluated on two open datasets, i.e., ACDC and MSCMR, and demonstrated promising performance by generating comparable or even better segmentation accuracy than the fully-supervised ap-proaches. 2.