Abstract
Automatic tooth instance segmentation on 3D dental models is a fundamental task for computer-aided orthodon-tic treatments. Existing learning-based methods rely heav-ily on expensive point-wise annotations. To alleviate this problem, we are the first to explore a low-cost annotation way for 3D tooth instance segmentation, i.e., labeling all tooth centroids and only a few teeth for each dental model.
Regarding the challenge when only weak annotation is pro-vided, we present a dental arch prior-assisted 3D tooth seg-mentation method, namely DArch. Our DArch consists of two stages, including tooth centroid detection and tooth in-stance segmentation. Accurately detecting the tooth cen-troids can help locate the individual tooth, thus benefiting the segmentation. Thus, our DArch proposes to leverage the dental arch prior to assist the detection. Specifically, we firstly propose a coarse-to-fine method to estimate the dental arch, in which the dental arch is initially generated by Bezier curve regression, and then a graph-based con-volutional network (GCN) is trained to refine it. With the estimated dental arch, we then propose a novel Arch-aware
Point Sampling (APS) method to assist the tooth centroid proposal generation. Meantime, a segmentor is indepen-dently trained using a patch-based training strategy, aim-ing to segment a tooth instance from a 3D patch centered at the tooth centroid. Experimental results on 4, 773 dental models have shown our DArch can accurately segment each tooth of a dental model, and its performance is superior to the state-of-the-art methods. 1.

Introduction
Dental models, obtained by direct intraoral scanning of the dentition, are commonly used in computer-aided den-tistry. Computer-aided dentistry requires dental models
*L. Qiu and C. Ye contribute equally.
†Corresponding author
Figure 1. An example of our segmentation result when using train-ing data with weak annotations for training models. Left: dental model with weak annotations, i.e., labelling all tooth centroids and only a few teeth. Right: our segmentation result. as input to assist dentists to analyze and evaluate patient-specific dental health and dental arrangement for the follow-ing treatments. Automatic tooth instance segmentation on dental models is an essential prerequisite step for computer-aided orthodontic treatments.
Although recent learning-based methods have achieved impressive performance on 3D tooth instance segmenta-tion [28, 29, 39], they rely heavily on a large number of data with dense manual annotations, such as labeling all points of every individual tooth from a dental model. Since an-notating such training data is particularly time-consuming, it is hard to collect a large enough dataset to cover com-plex dental models in real-world, thus largely limiting the generalization of those learning-based segmentation meth-ods [30,36,38]. One of the main challenges in automatic 3D tooth instance segmentation is locating each tooth object on a variety of dental models, some of which have missing, crowding, or misaligned teeth. Cui et al. [3] found that in the tooth detection stage, the tooth centroid is a more reli-able signal than the bounding box that is used to crop the detected tooth objects in the traditional approaches. Tooth detection thus can be converted to tooth centroids detec-tion. Motivated by their work, we propose a feasible and low-cost annotation way as shown in the right of the Fig. 1, specifying 3D centroids for all tooth instances that is,
and labeling dense instance mask for only a few teeth for each dental model, to alleviate the demand for ex-pensive point-wise annotations. In this paper, we present a novel detect-and-segment framework, including detect-ing tooth centroids and segmenting every teeth instance as-signed to the corresponding teeth centroid. We mainly focus on the detection stage based on the intuition that the more accurate the detection, the better the segmentation. Further-more, we adopt a patch-based training strategy to decrease the discriminating difficulty for our segmentor, which aims to segment a tooth instance from a 3D patch centered at the tooth centroid, rather than segment all tooth instances from a whole point cloud data of a dental model. In such a way, it makes a great demand on the tooth centroid pre-diction in our method. Previous detection methods for 3D point clouds [3,13,18] generally use the furthest point sam-pling (FPS) method to uniformly select the sampling points for generating proposals. For tooth centroid detection, the sampled points by FPS method generally contain irrelevant points, such as one located on the tooth crown and gingiva, which may lead to inaccurate proposals for tooth centroids.
To accurately and completely predict each tooth centroid of a dental model, we propose an arch-aware point sam-pling (APS) module for tooth centroid detection by intro-ducing dental arch prior to assist the detection procedure.
This is based on the observations that a dental arch natu-rally depicts one’s overall dentition, and all tooth centroids will fall on it. To estimate the dental arch of each dental model, we first formulate the dental arch by representing it as a curve passing through teeth centroids and then adopt a lightweight 1-D convolutional network to refine the den-tal arch [10, 17]. Different from FPS method that performs uniform sampling from the whole tooth votes, we sample points along the estimated dental arch to filter out a major-ity of irrelevant points. Experiments have shown that our proposed APS strategy can largely improve the detection accuracy for tooth centroids compared to FPS and benefit the following segmentation.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt for 3D tooth instance segmentation on dental models with weak annotations. The main contributions of our work can be summarized as follows:
• We are the first to explore a low-cost annotation way for 3D tooth instance segmentation and propose a novel framework named DArch to handle this chal-lenging task with weak annotations. We hope this at-tempt will inspire more learning-based methods in the weakly-annotated scenario.
• We propose a coarse-to-fine method to estimate the dental arch. Specifically, the dental arch is initially approximated by B´ezier curve regression, and then a graph-based convolutional network (GCN) is used for further refinement.
• We introduce a dental arch-aware point sampling (APS) module for tooth centroid detection by introduc-ing dental arch prior to assist the proposal generation.
• Extensive experiments have shown that our proposed
DArch can vastly improve the performance of tooth centroid detection compared to other methods using other sampling strategies. As for the segmentation per-formance, our DArch is superior to the state-of-the-art methods in both weakly- and fully-annotated scenar-ios. 2.