Abstract available at https://github.com/megvii-research/DCLS-SR.
In this paper, we tackle the problem of blind image super-resolution(SR) with a reformulated degradation model and two novel modules. Following the common practices of blind SR, our method proposes to improve both the kernel estimation as well as the kernel based high resolution im-age restoration. To be more specific, we first reformulate the degradation model such that the deblurring kernel es-timation can be transferred into the low resolution space.
On top of this, we introduce a dynamic deep linear filter module. Instead of learning a fixed kernel for all images, it can adaptively generate deblurring kernel weights condi-tional on the input and yields more robust kernel estimation.
Subsequently, a deep constrained least square filtering mod-ule is applied to generate clean features based on the refor-mulation and estimated kernel. The deblurred feature and the low input image feature are then fed into a dual-path structured SR network and restore the final high resolution result. To evaluate our method, we further conduct eval-uations on several benchmarks, including Gaussian8 and
DIV2KRK. Our experiments demonstrate that the proposed method achieves better accuracy and visual improvements against state-of-the-art methods. Codes and models are
*Corresponding author. 1.

Introduction
In this work, we study the problem of image super-resolution,i.e., restoring high-resolution images from low-resolution inputs. Specially, we aim for single image super-resolution (SISR), where only one observation is given which is a more practical setting and with a wide range of downstream applications [6, 8, 10, 17, 22, 26, 28, 48, 57, 59].
Most existing works based on the classical SISR degra-dation model assuming that the input LR image y is a blurred and down-scaled HR image x with additional white
Gaussian noise n, given by y = (x ∗ kh)↓s + n, (1) where kh is the blur kernel applied on x, ∗ denotes convolu-tion operation and ↓s denotes downsampling with scale fac-tor s. Previous blind SR approaches [9, 30] generally solve this problem with a two-stage framework: kernel estimation from LR image and kernel based HR image restoration.
We argue that although such a pipeline demonstrates rea-sonable performance for SR problem, there are two main drawbacks: First of all, it is difficult to accurately estimate
blur kernels of HR space directly from LR images due to the ambiguity produced by undersampling step [38, 46]. And the mismatch between the estimated kernel and the real one will cause significant performance drop and even lead to unpleasant artifacts [3, 9, 13, 56]. Secondly, it is also chal-lenging to find a suitable way to fully utilize the information of the estimated HR space kernel and LR space image. A common solution is to employ a kernel stretching strategy
[9,30,56], where the principal components of the vectorized kernel are preserved and stretched into degradation maps with the same size as the LR input. These degradation maps then can be concatenated with the input image or its features to generate a clean HR image. However, the spatial relation of the kernel is destroyed by the process of vectorizing and
PCA (Principal Component Analysis), which causes insuf-ficient usage of the kernel. The subsequent reconstruction network requires a huge effort to harmonize the inconsistent information between LR features and HR-specific kernels, limiting its performance in super-resolving images.
Towards this end, we present a modified learning strat-egy to tackle the blind SR problem, which can naturally avoid the above mentioned drawbacks. Specifically, we first reformulate the degradation model in a way such that the blur kernel estimation and image upsampling can be disen-tangled. In particular, as shown in Fig. 2, we derive a new kernel from the primitive kernel kh and LR image. It trans-fers the kernel estimation into the LR space and the new ker-nel can be estimated without aliasing ambiguity. Based on the new degradation, we further introduce the dynamic deep linear kernel (DDLK) to provide more equivalent choices of possible optimal solutions for the kernel to accelerate train-ing. Subsequently, a novel deep constrained least squares (DCLS) deconvolution module is applied in the feature do-main to obtain deblurred features. DCLS is robust to noise and can provide a theoretical and principled guidance to ob-tain clean images/features from blurred inputs. Moreover, it dosen’t require kernel stretching strategy and thus pre-serves the kernel’s spatial relation information. Then the deblurred features are fed into an upsampling module to restore the clean HR images. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the overall method has turned out to be surprisingly effective in recovering sharp and clean SR images.
The main contributions are summarized as follows:
• We introduce a new practical degradation model de-rived from Eq. (1). Such degradation maintains con-sistency with the classical model and allows us reliably estimate blur kernel from low-resolution space.
• We propose to use a dynamic deep linear kernel in-stead of a single layer kernel, which provides more equivalent choices of the optimal solution of the ker-nel, which is easier to learn.
Figure 2. Kernel reformulation examples. The top row and middle row are the LR images and the corresponding primitive kernels.
The bottom row is the reformulated kernels.
• We propose a novel deconvolution module named
DCLS that is applied on the features as channel-wise deblurring so that we can obtain a clean HR image.
• Extensive experiments on various degradation kernels demonstrate that our method leads to state-of-the-art performance in blind SR problems. 2.