Abstract
State-of-the-art fully intrinsic network for non-rigid shape matching are unable to disambiguate between shape inner symmetries. Meanwhile, recent advances in the func-tional map framework allow to enforce orientation preser-vation using a functional representation for tangent vector field transfer, through so-called complex functional maps.
Using this representation, we propose a new deep learning approach to learn orientation-aware features in a fully unsu-pervised setting. Our architecture is built on DiffusionNet, which makes our method robust to discretization changes, while adding a vector-field-based loss, which promotes ori-entation preservation without using (often unstable) extrin-sic descriptors. Our source code is available at: https:
//github.com/nicolasdonati/DUO-FM . 1.

Introduction
Learning for non-rigid shape correspondence is a key problem in 3D shape analysis with applications ranging from statistical shape analysis [6, 36] to deformation or tex-ture transfer [4]. Early approaches have focused either on learning informative features so that corresponding points have similar feature descriptors, e.g., [26], or modeling shape correspondence as a semantic segmentation problem.
Approaches in the latter category, e.g., [28, 31, 37, 51] aim to predict, for every point on the surface, the correspond-ing vertex id on some ground truth template shapes. Un-fortunately both approaches impose very little consistency between individual point correspondence predictions, while possibly being sensitive to the underlying shape discretiza-tion [43].
More recently, techniques have focused on both predict-ing and imposing a training loss on the entire map between each pair of shapes. This has been greatly facilitated by spectral approaches and especially the functional map rep-resentation [33], which encodes a map as a small matrix using the spectral (Laplacian) eigen-basis. A wide range of
Figure 1. Our method aims at producing orientation preserving maps for non-rigid 3D shape matching in a fully unsupervised setting through the estimation of descriptors whose gradients also align on source and target shape. approaches based on both supervised [9, 13, 23] and unsu-pervised losses [22, 40] have been proposed using the func-tional map representation. Key to all of these methods is learning feature functions that are then used to predict the functional map as a whole. As was shown across multiple recent works, this reduces the amount of necessary training data [13], provides strong regularization promoting smooth maps, makes the learned features robust to changes in dis-cretization [43], and alleviates the requirement of the exis-tence of a fixed template shape.
While using the compact functional map representation introduces a strong bias towards smooth approximately iso-metric correspondences, it nevertheless leaves room for both orientation-preserving and orientation-reversing cor-respondences. Although this orientation-agnostic property of functional maps can be useful, e.g., in symmetry detec-tion tasks, in most practical scenarios, the underlying sought correspondence is expected to preserve orientation. Unfor-tunately, restricting to only orientation-preserving maps is not straightforward while using the functional map repre-sentation, and the maps obtained using this framework can easily introduce local and global symmetry flipping (i.e., left/right ambiguity present in many organic shapes). As a result, existing state-of-the-art learning networks require ei-ther a supervised loss [13, 23, 43] or a rigid pre-alignment
[42] in order to disambiguate symmetries.
In this paper, we demonstrate that these limitations can be overcome by using the recently-proposed complex func-tional map representation [12] that is based on alignment of tangent vector fields (represented as complex functions) rather than real-valued functions.
To achieve this, we propose the first architecture that uses complex functional maps and learns specific features that align tangent bundles on surfaces. The use of the com-plex structure makes our approach fully orientation-aware, and helps to restrict the space of allowed correspondences to only globally orientation-preserving maps, while helping to regularize learning. We introduce losses adapted to com-plex functional maps and demonstrate that our network can be trained in a fully unsupervised manner without relying on rigid pre-alignments or ground truth correspondences.
More broadly, the vector-valued features learned by our ap-proach provide a novel and informative signal for non-rigid shape analysis tasks. 2.