Abstract
Depth reconstruction and hyperspectral reﬂectance re-construction are two active research topics in computer vi-sion and image processing. Conventionally, these two top-ics have been studied separately using independent imag-ing setups and there is no existing method which can ac-quire depth and spectral reﬂectance simultaneously in one shot without using special hardware. In this paper, we pro-pose a novel single-shot hyperspectral-depth reconstruc-tion method using an off-the-shelf RGB camera and projec-tor. Our method is based on a single color-dot projection, which simultaneously acts as structured light for depth re-construction and spatially-varying color illuminations for hyperspectral reﬂectance reconstruction. To jointly recon-struct the depth and the hyperspectral reﬂectance from a single color-dot image, we propose a novel end-to-end net-work architecture that effectively incorporates a geometric color-dot pattern loss and a photometric hyperspectral re-ﬂectance loss. Through the experiments, we demonstrate that our hyperspectral-depth reconstruction method outper-forms the combination of an existing state-of-the-art single-shot hyperspectral reﬂectance reconstruction method and depth reconstruction method. 1.

Introduction
Depth reconstruction and hyperspectral reﬂectance re-construction (spectral reconstruction, for short) are two ac-tive research areas in the ﬁelds of computer vision and im-age processing. Depth reconstruction aims at obtaining a scene’s depth map, which presents the distances from the camera to each scene point. On the other hand, spectral re-construction aims at acquiring scene’s spectral reﬂectance information, which provides the wavelength-by-wavelength reﬂectance of each scene point. Since the depth and the spectral reﬂectance provides the scene’s geometric and pho-tometric properties, respectively, simultaneously acquiring them, which we refer to as hyperspectral-depth reconstruc-tion, has various potential applications such as cultural her-itage [6, 19], artwork authentication [30], material classiﬁ-Color-dot  projection
Projector
RGB camera
Setup (mm) 731 669 607 544 482
Single RGB image
CNN e c n a t c e l f e
R
Wavelength
Estimated depth
Estimated spectral reflectance
Figure 1. The overview of our system. From a single RGB image captured with a random color-dot projection, we simultaneously reconstruct the depth and the spectral reﬂectance for each pixel. cation [5, 25], plant modeling [26], and relighting [35].
Although depth reconstruction and spectral reconstruc-tion have been studied separately, some systems are re-cently designed to simultaneously acquire both the depth and the spectral reﬂectance. They typically combine a conventional depth-sensing technology with a hyperspec-tral camera [9, 13, 32, 34, 36, 39]. However, the require-ment of a hyperspectral camera makes the system high cost.
Some other systems use a standard RGB camera in con-junction with a variable and controllable light source, which emits temporally-changing illuminations to acquire multi-band spectral observations [15,21–23,27,28,37]. However, these systems require multiple shots and thus are not appli-cable to dynamic scenes. Very recently, Baek et al. have proposed a single-shot system that uses a standard RGB camera and a diffractive optical element attached in front of the camera [3]. Although this system realizes a compact design using existing optical components, it still requires customized hardware design.
In this paper, we propose a novel single-shot system to simultaneously acquire the depth and the spectral re-ﬂectance using a standard RGB camera and an off-the-shelf RGB projector (see Fig. 1). Our system is based
on a single random color-dot projection, which simul-taneously acts as structured light for depth reconstruc-tion and spatially-varying color illuminations for spectral reconstruction. Since the random color dots provide a unique code pattern and three distinct RGB color illumina-tions for each local region, we exploit these cues for the hyperspectral-depth reconstruction. To effectively recon-struct the depth and the spectral reﬂectance from a single color-dot image, we propose a novel end-to-end deep learn-ing method. Since the location of an observed color-dot pat-tern depends on the scene depth, we perform the joint learn-ing of the depth and the spectral reﬂectance to improve the accuracy of each other, by considering the geometric warp-ing of the color-dot pattern. Furthermore, to address the difﬁculty of constructing a real-world hyperspectral-depth dataset, we develop a spectral renderer to generate a syn-thetic dataset using a spectral rendering model under the color-dot illumination. Main contributions of this work are summarized as follows. 1. We propose the ﬁrst single-shot hyperspectral-depth reconstruction system using a standard RGB camera and an off-the-shelf RGB projector without any hard-ware modiﬁcations. 2. We propose a novel network architecture and end-to-end learning method using a spectral renderer to si-multaneously reconstruct the depth and the spectral re-ﬂectance from a single color-dot pattern image.
B,G,R (0,0,1) (0,1,0) (1,0,0) 3 3
Color-dot pattern (cid:2172) (cid:1840)(cid:3090)
Color-dot illumination spectrum (cid:2168)(cid:2926)(cid:2911)(cid:2930) (cid:1840)(cid:3090)
Figure 2. Color-dot representations. Left: Color-dot pattern P , which is generated by randomly ﬁlling each projector pixel with one of three binary codes: R (0,0,1), G (0,1,0), and B (1,0,0).
Right: Color-dot illumination spectrum Lpat, which has Nλ-dimensional illumination spectrum at each pixel.
There are two other classes of closely related meth-lighting-based hyperspectral imaging methods using ods: an RGB camera [8, 12, 14, 29] and deep-learning-based ac-tive stereo methods [2, 10, 31, 38] (especially, Connecting the Dots [31], which learns to reconstruct the depth from a single gray-scale-dot pattern image, is the closest work to ours). Although these methods inspired us, they only reconstruct either the depth or the spectral reﬂectance. In contrast, our method simultaneously reconstructs the depth and the spectral reﬂectance from a single color-dot image based on end-to-end network learning, which consequently enables us to improve the accuracy of each other. 3. Proposed Method 3. We experimentally validate the effectiveness of our 3.1. Random Color-Dot Projection system for synthetic and real-world scenes. 2.