Abstract
While classic video anomaly detection (VAD) requires labeled normal videos for training, emerging unsupervised
VAD (UVAD) aims to discover anomalies directly from fully unlabeled videos. However, existing UVAD methods still rely on shallow models to perform detection or initializa-tion, and they are evidently inferior to classic VAD meth-ods. This paper proposes a full deep neural network (DNN) based solution that can realize highly effective UVAD. First, we, for the first time, point out that deep reconstruction can be surprisingly effective for UVAD, which inspires us to unveil a property named “normality advantage”, i.e., normal events will enjoy lower reconstruction loss when
DNN learns to reconstruct unlabeled videos. With this prop-erty, we propose Localization based Reconstruction (LBR) as a strong UVAD baseline and a solid foundation of our solution. Second, we propose a novel self-paced refine-ment (SPR) scheme, which is synthesized into LBR to con-duct UVAD. Unlike ordinary self-paced learning that injects more samples in an easy-to-hard manner, the proposed SPR scheme gradually drops samples so that suspicious anoma-lies can be removed from the learning process. In this way,
SPR consolidates normality advantage and enables better
UVAD in a more proactive way. Finally, we further design a variant solution that explicitly takes the motion cues into account. The solution evidently enhances the UVAD per-formance, and it sometimes even surpasses the best clas-sic VAD methods. Experiments show that our solution not only significantly outperforms existing UVAD methods by a wide margin (5% to 9% AUROC), but also enables UVAD to catch up with the mainstream performance of classic VAD. 1.

Introduction
Video anomaly detection (VAD) [29, 58] has constantly been a valuable topic in computer vision, as it aims to au-*Equal contribution.
†Corresponding author. (a) Classic video anomaly detection. (b) Unsupervised video anomaly detection (UVAD).
Figure 1. Comparison of classic VAD and UVAD. tomatically discover abnormal events (i.e., anomalies) that deviate from frequently-seen normal routine in surveillance videos. With a great potential to be applied to realms like public security and city management [53,90], VAD enjoys a continuous interest from both academia and industry. How-ever, VAD remains open and unsolved. The underlying rea-son is that anomalies are typically rare and novel, and such characteristics make anomalies hard to be foreseen or enu-merated in practice. As a result, a sufficient and comprehen-sive collection of anomaly data can be particularly difficult or even impossible, which makes the fully supervised clas-sification paradigm not directly applicable to VAD.
Thus, classic VAD follows a semi-supervised setup, which labels a training set that contains only normal videos to train a normality model (see Fig. 1a). During inference, video events that do not fit this normality model are viewed as anomalies. Although such a classic semi-supervised
VAD paradigm avoids the thorny issue to collect anomaly data, it still requires human efforts to label a training set with pure normal events. The labeling process can also be particularly tedious and labor-intensive, especially when faced with surging surveillance videos. To alleviate this problem, a natural idea is to perform unsupervised VAD (UVAD), which aims to discover anomalies directly from fully unlabeled videos in an unsupervised manner (see Fig. 1b). In this way, UVAD no longer requires labeling nor-mal videos to build a training set, which can significantly reduce the cost of time and labor. Therefore, several recent works [8, 39, 53, 74] have explored this topic as a promising alternative to classic VAD (reviewed in Sec. 2.1).
Despite some progress, we notice that existing UVAD solutions suffer from two prominent limitations: (1) Exist-ing UVAD methods typically rely on shallow models to per-form detection or initialization, and most of them still in-volve hand-crafted feature descriptors. To be more specific, the core idea of representative UVAD methods [8, 39, 74] is to detect drastic changes as anomalies, which often in-volves learning a shallow detection model (e.g., logistic re-gression) with descriptor (e.g., 3D gradients) based video representations. However, the expressive power of both the shallow model and hand-crafted descriptors can be limited.
The latest work [53] for the first time introduces deep neu-ral networks (DNNs) to avoid hand-crafted descriptors, but it must resort to an initialization step that involves an iso-(2) The lation forest [36] model to obtain initial results. performance of existing UVAD methods is evidently infe-rior to classic VAD methods. Taking the commonly-used
UCSDped1 and UCSDped2 dataset for an example, recent classic VAD methods usually lead existing UVAD methods by about 10% AUROC. Meanwhile, existing UVAD meth-ods typically report their performance on earlier datasets, while their applicability and effectiveness on recent bench-mark dataset like ShanghaiTech [38] are also unknown.
To move beyond the above limitations, we propose a novel DNN based solution that can perform UVAD in a highly effective and fully end-to-end manner. Specifically, this paper contributes to UVAD in terms of three aspects:
• We, for the first time, point out that deep reconstruction is actually surprisingly effective for UVAD, while such effectiveness further motivates us to unveil the prop-erty named “normality advantage”. Based on such a property, we design Localization based Reconstruction (LBR), which serves as a strong deep UVAD baseline and the solid foundation of our deep UVAD solution.
• We design a novel self-paced refinement (SPR) scheme, which is synthesized into LBR to consoli-date normality advantage and enable more proactive
UVAD. Unlike ordinary self-paced learning (SPL) that gradually injects training samples from easy to hard, the proposed SPR scheme aims to drop suspicious samples, so as to remove anomalies and focus on learn-ing with normality. To our best knowledge, this is also the first attempt to tailor SPL for addressing VAD.
• We further design a motion enhanced solution that ex-plicitly takes the motion cues into account. The variant solution can consistently enhance the detection capa-bility, and sometimes even allows our UVAD solution to outperform state-of-the-art classic VAD methods.
Experiments demonstrate the remarkable advantage of our solution against its UVAD counterparts. Furthermore, it for the first time achieves readily comparable performance to recent classic VAD methods on mainstream benchmarks. 2.