Abstract
Integrating a foreground object into a background scene with illumination harmonization is an important but chal-lenging task in computer vision and augmented reality com-munity. Existing methods mainly focus on foreground and background appearance consistency or the foreground ob-ject shadow generation, which rarely consider global ap-In this paper, pearance and illumination harmonization. we formulate seamless illumination harmonization as an illumination exchange and aggregation problem. Specifi-cally, we firstly apply a physically-based rendering method to construct a large-scale, high-quality dataset (named IH) for our task, which contains various types of foreground ob-jects and background scenes with different lighting condi-tions. Then, we propose a deep image-based illumination harmonization GAN framework named DIH-GAN, which makes full use of a multi-scale attention mechanism and il-lumination exchange strategy to directly infer mapping re-lationship between the inserted foreground object and the corresponding background scene. Meanwhile, we also use adversarial learning strategy to further refine the illumi-nation harmonization result. Our method can not only achieve harmonious appearance and illumination for the foreground object but also can generate compelling shadow cast by the foreground object. Comprehensive experiments on both our IH dataset and real-world images show that our proposed DIH-GAN provides a practical and effective solution for image-based object illumination harmonization editing, and validate the superiority of our method against state-of-the-art methods. Our IH dataset is available at https://github.com/zhongyunbao/Dataset. 1.

Introduction
As a part of scene editing, editing illumination for in-serted object to achieve scene illumination harmonization
*This work was co-supervised by Chengjiang Long and Chunxia Xiao.
†Corresponding author. (a) (b) (c) (d)
Figure 1. Illumination editing for an inserted object in a single image. (a) Foreground object imagr with a illumination condi-tion. (b)