Abstract
Semi-supervised object detection (SSOD) aims to facil-itate the training and deployment of object detectors with the help of a large amount of unlabeled data. Though various self-training based and consistency-regularization based SSOD methods have been proposed, most of them are anchor-based detectors, ignoring the fact that in many real-world applications anchor-free detectors are more de-manded.
In this paper, we intend to bridge this gap and propose a DenSe Learning (DSL) based anchor-free
SSOD algorithm.
Specifically, we achieve this goal by introducing several novel techniques, including an Adap-tive Filtering strategy for assigning multi-level and accu-rate dense pixel-wise pseudo-labels, an Aggregated Teacher for producing stable and precise pseudo-labels, and an uncertainty-consistency-regularization term among scales and shuffled patches for improving the generalization ca-pability of the detector. Extensive experiments are con-ducted on MS-COCO and PASCAL-VOC, and the re-sults show that our proposed DSL method records new state-of-the-art SSOD performance, surpassing existing methods by a large margin. Codes can be found at https://github.com/chenbinghui1/DSL. 1.

Introduction
The recent rapid development of object detection (OD) methods [5, 17, 40] largely owes to the availability of large-scale and well-annotated datasets, such as MS-COCO benchmark [27]. With the increasing demand for more powerful and accurate detection models, the need to col-lect and label more data also increases. However, manually labeling the class labels and bounding-boxes for large-scale datasets is a very expensive and tedious job, which is not cost-effective in practical applications. As a remedy, semi-supervised [38,48] and self-supervised [28] OD algorithms, which aim to employ the large amount of unlabeled data to improve the performance of OD, have been attracting much
In this paper, we focus on the attention in recent years.
Figure 1. The SSOD performance comparisons between the pro-posed anchor-free based DSL and anchor-based methods STAC
[38] and ISMT [48]. One can observe that anchor-based detec-tor Faster-RCNN [36] and anchor-free based detector FCOS [44] have similar baseline performance under the supervised settings, while our proposed DSL achieves the state-of-the-art SSOD per-formance, outperforming the existing methods by a large margin. semi-supervised objection detection (SSOD) methods.
The current state-of-the-art SSOD methods are pseudo-label based approaches [31, 38, 48, 51], while most of them are based on a two-stage anchor-based detector such as
Faster-RCNN [36]. Specifically, they first use a teacher model to generate pseudo-labels for unlabeled images and then train a two-stage anchor-based detector with both la-beled and unlabeled images. However, in real-world ap-plications, the one-stage anchor-free based detectors (e.g.,
FCOS [44]) are more attractive and practical since they are much easier and efficient to be deployed on resource limited devices without heavy pre/post-processing except NMS.
Different from Faster-RCNN, the learning of FCOS is es-tablished on dense feature predictions; that is, each pixel is directly supervised by the corresponding label. Without the help of predefined anchors and multiple refinements of the predictions, the learning of anchor-free based detectors requires more careful guidance, especially under the SSOD settings. Unfortunately, few works on anchor-free SSOD
have been reported, and how to handle the dense pseudo-labels predicted by anchor-free detectors remains a chal-lenging problem.
To address the above mentioned challenges, in this paper we propose a DenSe Learning (DSL) algorithm for anchor-free SSOD 1. Specifically, to perform careful label guid-ance for dense learning, we first present an Adaptive Filter-ing (AF) strategy to partition pseudo-labels into three fine-grained parts, including background, foreground, and ignor-able regions. Then we refine these pseudo-labels by using a MetaNet so as to remove the classification false-positives, which have higher prediction scores but are actually false predictions in category. Considering that the correctness of pseudo-labels determines the performance of SSOD mod-els, we introduce an Aggregated Teacher (AT) to further enhance the stability and quality of the estimated pseudo-labels. Moreover, to improve the model generalization ca-pability, we learn from shuffled image patches and regu-larize the uncertainty of dense feature maps to make them consistent among image scales. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
• A simple yet effective DenSe Learning (DSL) method is developed to improve the utilization of large-scale unlabelled data for SSOD. To our best knowledge, this is the first anchor-free method for SSOD.
• An Adaptive Filtering (AF) strategy is proposed to assign fine-grained pseudo-labels to each pixel; an
Aggregated Teacher (AT) is introduced to enhance the stability and quality of estimated pseudo-labels; and learning from shuffled patches and uncertainty-consistency-regularization among scales are employed to improve the model generalization performance.
Extensive experiments conducted on MS-COCO [27] and PASCAL-VOC [8] demonstrate that the proposed DSL method achieves significant performance improvements over existing state-of-the-art SSOD methods. 2.