Abstract
Given a set of putative 3D-3D point correspondences, we aim to remove outliers and estimate rigid transformation with 6 degrees of freedom (DOF). Simultaneously estimat-ing these 6 DOF is time-consuming due to high-dimensional parameter space. To solve this problem, it is common to decompose 6 DOF, i.e. independently compute 3-DOF ro-tation and 3-DOF translation. However, high non-linearity of 3-DOF rotation still limits the algorithm efficiency, es-pecially when the number of correspondences is large. In contrast, we propose to decompose 6 DOF into (2+1) and (1+2) DOF. Specifically, (2+1) DOF represent 2-DOF ro-tation axis and 1-DOF displacement along this rotation axis. (1+2) DOF indicate 1-DOF rotation angle and 2-DOF displacement orthogonal to the above rotation axis.
To compute these DOF, we design a novel two-stage strat-egy based on inlier set maximization. By leveraging branch and bound, we first search for (2+1) DOF, and then the re-maining (1+2) DOF. Thanks to the proposed transformation decomposition and two-stage search strategy, our method is deterministic and leads to low computational complex-ity. We extensively compare our method with state-of-the-art approaches. Our method is more accurate and robust than the approaches that provide similar efficiency to ours.
Our method is more efficient than the approaches whose ac-curacy and robustness are comparable to ours. 1.

Introduction
Rigid point cloud registration is to align two 3D point clouds by an unknown-but-sought transformation with 6 de-grees of freedom (DOF) [1]. It is a fundamental problem in computer vision and robotics. Existing methods can be classified into two categories in terms of whether the pu-tative 3D-3D point correspondences (corrupted by outliers) are required. The methods that do not require correspon-dences typically rely on the initial value, which leads to low generality [6, 7], or provides low efficiency [36, 8]. To overcome these limitations, several methods requiring puta-*Wen Chen and Haoang Li contributed equally to this work.
†Yun-Hui Liu is corresponding author. (a) Stage I (b) Stage II
Figure 1. The proposed two-stage transformation estimation and outlier removal method. (xi, yi) denotes a 3D-3D point corre-spondence. (a) In stage I, we search for 2 DOF of rotation, i.e. rotation axis, and 1 DOF of translation, i.e. displacement along the rotation axis. The optimal (2+1) DOF fit the most candidate inliers composed of both true and pseudo inliers. We save candi-date inliers and discard partial outliers. (b) In stage II, we search for the remaining 1 DOF of rotation, i.e. rotation angle, and 2 DOF of translation, i.e. displacement orthogonal to rotation axis. The optimal (1+2) DOF fit the largest number of true inliers. We save true inliers and discard pseudo inliers. tive correspondences have been proposed [4, 24, 35, 38]. In practice, putative correspondences can be relatively easily obtained using the handcrafted or deep learning-based de-scriptors [11, 14, 29]. In this paper, we consider the cases that putative correspondences are known.
For a set of putative correspondences, only inliers but not outliers can be fitted by the same transformation. Ac-cordingly, point cloud registration with putative correspon-dences is commonly formulated as the inlier set maximiza-tion problem [20, 26]. Specifically, our problem aims to find the optimal 6-DOF transformation that fits the largest number of (inlier) correspondences. To tackle this prob-lem, a straightforward way is to simultaneously search the 6 DOF [8, 27, 36]. However, their efficiency is unsatis-factory due to the high-dimensional search space. To over-come this limitation, a common strategy is to decompose the 6 DOF, i.e. independently compute 3-DOF rotation and 3-DOF translation [12, 16, 26, 31, 35]. However, existing decomposition methods have two main limitations. First, high non-linearity of 3 DOF of rotation still limits the al-gorithm efficiency [26, 31]. Second, in order to generate translation/rotation-invariant features, the size of input in-creases a lot [24, 35]. Another group of methods to solve the problem is based on sampling, such as RANSAC [12, 16].
But they are non-deterministic: outputs on independent tri-als with the same setup may be inconsistent. The inconsis-tency affects the algorithm robustness.
In contrast, we propose a deterministic and more effi-cient method based on a novel decomposition strategy. The proposed strategy first computes 2 DOF of rotation and 1
DOF of translation, followed by estimating the remaining 1 DOF of rotation and 2 DOF of translation. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 1(a), the 2 DOF of rotation and 1 DOF of translation refer to a 2-DOF rotation axis and a 1-DOF dis-placement along the rotation axis, respectively. We define
“candidate” inliers as the observations fitted by the same 2 DOF of rotation and 1 DOF of translation. We search for these (2+1) DOF to fit as many candidate inliers (see blue and green correspondences) as possible. The search processing is based on branch and bound (BnB) [15]. Com-pared with searching for 3-DOF rotation with higher non-linearity [26, 31], the proposed search can provide tighter bound and thus improve the efficiency.
After obtaining 2 DOF of rotation and 1 DOF of trans-lation, we compute the remaining 1 DOF of rotation and 2
DOF of translation. As shown in Fig. 1(b), the remaining 1
DOF of rotation and 2 DOF of translation represent 1-DOF rotation angle and 2-DOF displacement orthogonal to rota-tion axis, respectively. We define “true” inliers as a subset of candidate inliers that can be also fitted by the same 1 DOF of rotation and 2 DOF of translation. We search for these (1+2) DOF to fit as many true inliers (see green correspon-dences) as possible and discard pseudo-inliers (see blue cor-respondences). Our search in this stage is based on nested
BnB. Attributed to relatively low computational complexity of nested BnB, our search achieves good efficiency.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel strategy for transformation decom-position. It reduces the non-linearity of 3-DOF rota-tion, and thus improves the algorithm efficiency.
• We design a deterministic and efficient search strategy for parameter estimation. tight bounds and low computational complexity. two-stage
It leads to
We extensively compare our method with state-of-the-art approaches. Our method is more accurate and robust than the approaches that provide similar efficiency to ours. Our method is more efficient than the approaches whose accu-racy and robustness are comparable to ours. 2.