Abstract
Evaluating photometric stereo using real-world dataset is important yet difficult. Existing datasets are insufficient due to their limited scale and random distributions in shape and material. This paper presents a new real-world pho-tometric stereo dataset with “ground truth” normal maps, which is 10 times larger than the widely adopted one. More importantly, we propose to control the shape and material variations by fabricating objects from CAD models with carefully selected materials, covering typical aspects of re-flectance properties that are distinctive for evaluating pho-tometric stereo methods. By benchmarking recent photo-metric stereo methods using these 100 sets of images, with a special focus on recent learning based solutions, a 10×10 shape-material error distribution matrix is visualized to de-pict a “portrait” for each evaluated method. From such comprehensive analysis, open problems in this field are dis-cussed. To inspire future research, this dataset is available at https://photometricstereo.github.io. 1.

Introduction
Photometric stereo recovers pixel-wise surface normals of an object by observing it under different lighting condi-tions [46]. Compared with other 3D modeling approaches, photometric stereo can produce 3D (strictly speaking 2.5D) information with abundant details due to the per-wise re-covery. Photometric stereo is an ill-posed problem because of the unknown reflectance and lighting conditions of the target object. There is a long research history to incorpo-rate different assumptions on shapes (e.g., a convex shape to avoid cast shadow) and reflectance (e.g., an isotropic BRDF (Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function) to apply reflectance symmetry prior) to make the problem tractable.
*Corresponding authors.
†Part of this work was finished as a remote intern at Peking University.
To figure out the effectiveness of various assumptions for solving real-world photometric stereo problems, the DiLi-GenT [37] benchmark dataset has been built and success-fully applied to conduct quantitative evaluations for photo-metric stereo methods published before the year 2016 1.
The development of deep learning based photometric stereo methods demonstrates performance boost (over those reported in 2016) according to the constantly refreshing benchmark records reported by papers using DiLiGenT as a benchmark [37]. However, as a dataset originally pro-posed in the era that non-learning based photometric stereo methods dominate, DiLiGenT [37] shows deficiencies in two aspects for evaluating recent photometric stereo meth-ods. First, as learning based methods are often trained by large-scale data with various shapes and reflectance, the small data scale (10 objects) of DiLiGenT [37] can be eas-ily overfitted, which brings bottleneck for model evaluation and improvement. Second, as learning based methods are less interpretable, the in-depth analysis to understanding a pre-trained neural photometric stereo model can hardly be achieved, as DiLiGenT [37] uses randomly picked up ob-jects (shapes and materials) from daily life.
To address these challenges, this paper builds a new pho-tometric stereo benchmark dataset2, named DiLiGenT102, which contains 100 objects of 10 shapes multiplied by 10 materials3, as shown in Fig. 1. These 100 objects are fab-ricated with the high-precise computer numerical control 1The earlier version of [37] was published in CVPR 2016 [39] 2“DiLiGenT” stands for benchmarking photometric stereo under
Directional Lighting, General reflectance, with “ground Truth” shape.
Since our dataset follows the same setup assumption for evaluating photo-metric stereo methods, we borrow the abbreviation of DiLiGenT as prefix. 3The abbreviations of materials and shapes are listed below: For ma-terials, polyoxymethylene (POM), polypropylene (PP), polyamide (NY-LON); polyvinyl chloride (PVC), acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS), phenol formaldehyde resin (BAKELITE), aluminium alloy 6061 (AL), brass H59 (CU), die steel P20 (STEEL), and polymethyl methacry-late (ACRYLIC); for the polyhedron shapes, SQUARE is rhombicubocta-hedron, PENTAGON is the upper half of icosahedron, and HEXAGON is truncated icosahedron.
Figure 1. 100 sets of data in the DiLiGenT102 dataset represented as a shape-material (10 × 10) matrix. For shape variation (row by row), 10 materials are divided into three groups: Sphere group contains smooth shapes of a sphere – BALL and its variants with different types of details – GOLF, SPIKE, and NUT; Polyhedron group contains piece-wise shapes of multiple directional faces – SQUARE, PENTAGON, and HEXAGON; General-shape group contains objects from industry machining and daily life with discontinuous surfaces – PROPELLER,
TURBINE, and BUNNY. For material variation (column by column), 10 materials are also divided into three groups: Isotropic group with diffuse and moderately specular materials – POM, PP, NYLON, PVC, ABS, and BAKELITE; Anisotropic group contains metallic materials with anisotropic reflectance – AL, CU, and STEEL; Challenging group contains a translucent material – ACRYLIC. The leftmost column shows objects made by BAKELITE captured under natural illumination (and a slightly slanted viewpoint) to provide an intuitive reference (not used for computation). The rightmost column shows “ground truth” surface normal map corresponding to the shape in each row. (CNC) machining process to guarantee the consistency of shape across diverse materials. As a result, we can control the shape variation from simple to complex, and the mate-rial variation with different levels of difficulties for photo-metric stereo. CAD models used for fabricating these ob-jects are registered to the image coordinate for calibrating
“ground truth” surface normal maps. To the best of our knowledge, DiLiGenT102 is the largest real-world photo-metric stereo benchmark dataset until now.
We apply DiLiGenT102 dataset to conduct a compre-hensive benchmark evaluation for up-to-date photometric stereo methods, with a special focus on learning based solutions. With the large-scale size and controlled shape and material variations, DiLiGenT102 provides an insight-ful comparison to distinctively reveal pros and cons for photometric stereo methods in the era that learning based
In summary, this paper contributes solutions dominate. the largest real-world photometric stereo benchmark dataset with the following new characteristics:
• 10× larger scale than the DiLiGenT dataset [37];
• with controlled shape (high-precision CAD models as “ground truth”) and materials (carefully fabricated materials covering isotropic (diffuse and specular), anisotropic, and translucent reflectance); and
• up-to-date benchmark evaluation results (the most comprehensive one for learning based methods until now) presented as shape-material error matrices with inspiration to future work. 2.