Abstract
Accurate change detection enables a wide range of tasks in visual surveillance, anomaly detection and mo-bile robotics. However, contemporary change detection ap-proaches assume an ideal matching between the current and stored scenes, whereas only coarse matching is possible in real-world scenarios. Thus, contemporary approaches fail to show the reported performance in real-world settings. To overcome this limitation, we propose SimSaC. SimSaC con-currently conducts scene flow estimation and change detec-tion and is able to detect changes with imperfect matches.
To train SimSaC without additional manual labeling, we propose a training scheme with random geometric trans-formations and the cut-paste method. Moreover, we design an evaluation protocol which reflects performance in real-world settings. In designing the protocol, we collect a test benchmark dataset, which we claim as another contribu-tion. Our comprehensive experiments verify that SimSaC displays robust performance even given imperfect matches and the performance margin compared to contemporary ap-proaches is huge. 1.

Introduction
Robust scene change detection (SCD) [52] plays a crucial role in various areas such as visual surveillance
[33], anomaly detection [10], mobile robotics [43] and au-tonomous vehicles [30]. The SCD task aims to identify the changes in the current scene compared to the scene at dif-ferent time steps. For storing past observations, the SCD task demands a database system. Numerous factors includ-ing view variation, illumination change, dynamic objects, different weather and camera jitter make the task challeng-ing.
The SCD task in general requires visual place recog-nition (VPR) [39] to pair the current scene (query) with
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†work done while with KAIST
Figure 1. Overview of the proposed SimSaC. The proposed Sim-SaC displays robust performance even given imperfect matches of reference and query images with which conventional methods fail. the scenes (reference) stored in a database system. After
VPR, SCD analyzes the paired scenes for identification of changes. Contemporary approaches for SCD, however, as-sumes an ideal match of the scene between the current and the past time steps although observing the same scene with a perfect match hardly occurs in real-world applications.
Thus, contemporary approaches would not display the re-ported performance when deployed to practical systems.
Furthermore, the need for investigating the effect of imper-fect matches for SCD and developing a robust neural archi-tecture for pragmatic SCD lingers.
To overcome the limitation and develop a neural archi-tecture that could readily function in real-world settings, we propose simultaneous Scene Flow Estimation and Change
Detection (SimSaC). SimSaC is a neural network that con-currently performs scene flow estimation and change detec-tion (Fig. 1). We propose to learn the two tasks in a multi-task learning setting (dual-task learning) by which Sim-SaC leverages dense correspondence (scene flow) and mis-correspondence (change). The proposed dual-task learning leads to robust change detection performance even given imperfect matches of reference and query images, in which
conventional methods are unsuccessful. In addition, we pro-pose a training scheme to learn the two tasks without re-quiring additional labels. We introduce random geometric transformations [41] and the cut-paste method [19] to query images and generate pseudo labels for scene flow estimation and change detection.
Next, we carefully design an evaluation protocol for scene change detection that reflects performance in real-world settings and compare conventional methods under the proposed evaluation protocol. Specifically, we propose to measure performance with imperfect matches of reference and query images in addition to the conventional evaluation protocol. For this, we collect a new evaluation benchmark dataset. To collect the benchmark dataset, we first run an off-the-shelf VPR algorithm over change detection evalua-tion datasets and collect imperfect matches. Moreover, we attentively remove the incorrect matches where the VPR al-gorithm fails to discover the matches. We open-source the proposed benchmark dataset.
In summary, the main contributions of our work are as follows: 1. Problem Formulation: We carefully formulate a change detection task that reflects performance in real-world settings for the first time. We expect our work would provoke the evolution of the change detection task towards practical use cases. 2. SimSaC Architecture: We propose the SimSaC net-work for robust change detection which leverages both dense correspondence (scene flow) and mis-correspondence (change). 3. Robust Training Scheme: We design a training scheme that enhances the robustness of change detec-tion without requiring additional annotations. 4. Evaluation Dataset: We collect a new benchmark dataset consisting of imperfect matches for measuring change detection performance in real-world scenarios. 5. Open Source: We contribute to the research society by making the source code of the proposed SimSaC network, the pretrained network parameters and the benchmark dataset public. 2.