Abstract 1.

Introduction
Earth observation is a fundamental tool for monitoring the evolution of land use in specific areas of interest. Ob-serving and precisely defining change, in this context, re-quires both time-series data and pixel-wise segmentations.
To that end, we propose the DynamicEarthNet dataset that consists of daily, multi-spectral satellite observations of 75 selected areas of interest distributed over the globe with im-agery from Planet Labs. These observations are paired with pixel-wise monthly semantic segmentation labels of 7 land use and land cover (LULC) classes. DynamicEarthNet is the first dataset that provides this unique combination of daily measurements and high-quality labels. In our experi-ments, we compare several established baselines that either utilize the daily observations as additional training data (semi-supervised learning) or multiple observations at once (spatio-temporal learning) as a point of reference for future research. Finally, we propose a new evaluation metric SCS that addresses the specific challenges associated with time-series semantic change segmentation. The data is available at: https://mediatum.ub.tum.de/1650201.
Making peace with nature is the defining task of the 21st century.
Ant´onio Guterres, UN Secretary General
* Authors share first authorship. † Authors share senior authorship. ‡
Corresponding author: xiaoxiang.zhu@dlr.de.
Society is rapidly becoming more aware of the human footprint on the world’s climate. Overwhelming evidence shows that climate change has both short-term and long-term effects on almost every aspect of our lives [27]. Us-ing simulations and global climate metrics, it is nowadays possible to observe changes at a global scale, like the ris-ing sea levels or changes of the gulf stream. In contrast, precise predictions of local changes are much harder to ob-tain. Common examples include land use by agriculture, deforestation, flooding, wildfires, growth of urban areas, and transportation infrastructure. It is of critical importance to monitor such local changes since these are the factors that ultimately exacerbate the global climate crisis.
Satellite images are a powerful tool in this context to track local changes to the environment in specific regions.
Observing change at a local scale requires two conditions: high frequency of satellite observations and pixel-precise understanding of the observed surface. Existing datasets often fail to provide these conditions. Whenever pixel-wise annotations are provided, only static images can be used [43] or the revisit frequency is limited to once a year [14, 36]. Datasets with coarser annotations have ei-ther an irregular [11] or monthly revisit frequency [38]. As an example of land changes, in 2020, 46km2 of the rainfor-est in Brazil were destroyed every day [29]. This suggests that if we analyze the satellite images of that area once per month, we potentially miss deforestation of the equivalent of the city of Los Angeles, California. As Brazil alone has
millions of square kilometers of forest, automatic methods are required to detect these and other kinds of land changes.
Current pixel-precise automatic methods are predominantly based on deep learning and thus require annotated data to learn.
In this work, we present DynamicEarthNet, a time-series satellite imagery dataset with daily revisits of 75 local re-gions across the globe. The dataset comprises consistent, occlusion-free daily observations with multi-spectral im-agery over the span of two years (2018-2019). We further provide annotated monthly semantic segmentation labels.
The main focus is to segment and detect changes in the development of general land use and land cover (LULC).
Specifically, we focus on the following LULC classes: im-pervious surfaces, water, soil, agriculture, wetlands, snow
& ice, and forest & other vegetation.
In comparison to semantic segmentation on standard computer vision benchmarks, satellite imagery is subject to various additional challenges. Most prominently, labeled areas in satellite images typically have very intricate shapes that are significantly more complex than everyday objects.
We show that well-performing methods [10, 32] on stan-dard vision benchmarks do not necessarily transfer well to this domain. Furthermore, common segmentation metrics are not optimal for quantifying the performance on the task of semantic change segmentation. We alleviate this issue by proposing a new evaluation protocol that captures the essence of semantic change segmentation. DynamicEarth-Net and the proposed evaluation protocol encourage the de-velopment of more specialized algorithms that can handle the particular challenges of daily time-series satellite im-agery. In summary, our contributions are as follows:
• We present a large-scale dataset of multi-spectral satel-lite imagery with daily observations of 75 separate ar-eas of interest around the globe.
• We provide dense, monthly annotations of 7 land use and land cover (LULC) semantic classes.
• We propose a novel evaluation protocol that models two central properties of semantic change segmenta-tion: binary change and semantic segmentation.
• We evaluate multiple baseline approaches on our data for the task of detecting semantic change. We show how the time-series nature of our data can be leveraged for optimal performance. 2.