Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel iterative dynamic cost volume for multi-view stereo. Compared with other works, our cost volume is much lighter, thus could be processed with 2D convolution based GRU. Notably, the every-step output of the GRU could be further used to generate new cost volume.
In this way, an iterative GRU-based opti-mizer is constructed. Furthermore, we present a cascade and hierarchical reﬁnement architecture to utilize the multi-scale information and speed up the convergence. Specif-ically, a lightweight 3D CNN is utilized to generate the coarsest initial depth map which is essential to launch the
GRU and guarantee a fast convergence. Then the depth map is reﬁned by multi-stage GRUs which work on the pyramid feature maps. Extensive experiments on the DTU and Tanks & Temples benchmarks demonstrate that our method could achieve state-of-the-art results in terms of ac-curacy, speed and memory usage. Code will be released at https://github.com/bdwsq1996/Effi-MVS. 1.

Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) aims to reconstruct a dense 3D model based on a series of posed images and corresponding camera parameters. Predicting depth maps and then fusing the depth map into a point cloud model is the most com-mon pipeline of MVS. As a fundamental problem, MVS has been studied for decades in the ﬁeld of computer vi-sion [5, 8, 10, 12, 16, 23, 24, 27, 28, 34–36]
Recently, we witness a rapid development of deep learn-ing based MVS approaches [5, 10, 12, 23, 28, 34–36]. Gen-erally speaking, the most common basic structure for the
MVS task is to use the features of a sequence of images to construct a 3D cost (correlation) volume, then regularize it with 3D CNN, and ﬁnally regress the depth. There have been amount of works [3, 4, 17, 31, 32, 35, 36] follow this pipeline and outperform most traditional methods in term of the reconstruction accuracy on MVS benchmarks [1, 13].
However, due to the high GPU memory and processing
*The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally. Yuchao Dai is the corre-sponding author (daiyuchao@gmail.com).
) m m ( l l a r e v
O 0.36 0.35 0.34 0.33 0.32 0.31
CasMVSNet
CVP-MVSNet
UCS-Net
PatchmatchNet
Ours(Iters: 3 3 3)
Ours(Iters: 1 1 1) 0 0.25 0.5 0.75 1 1.25 1.5
Run-Time(s)
) m m ( l l a r e v
O 0.36 0.35 0.34 0.33 0.32 0.31 2 4 8 6
GPU Mem.(GB) 10
Figure 1. Comparison between our method and SOTA learning-based multi-view stereo methods on the DTU dataset [1]. We report the accuracy in terms of the Overall Error with respect to running time (Left) and GPU memory consumption (Right). The image resolution is 1600×1184. The ‘Iters’ represent the numbers of iterations at each stage. time requirement of the regularization step, existing meth-ods [31, 35] can only deal with images with low resolution.
Obviously, in addition to improving the reconstruction quality, it is also very important to reduce the running time and GPU memory consumption, which makes the learning-based MVS works adaptable to memory and com-putational restricted devices. Recently, a couple of works
[5, 10, 28, 36, 37] have been proposed to improve the ef-ﬁciency for MVS. However, it is still very challenging to improve the accuracy and reduce the consumption at the same time. In this work, we aim at improving the computa-tion speed and reducing the memory consumption of high-resolution MVS, and ensuring great reconstruction quality.
The core idea of our method is to construct a lightweight and dynamic cost volume which could be processed in an iterative way. This strategy could bring many beneﬁts.
Firstly, it greatly reduces the peak memory usage in the in-ference phase due to the use of lightweight cost volume.
Secondly, the iterative and dynamic processing could guar-antee a large search space which is important to the accu-racy. At last, our dynamic cost volume is able to converge in a few iterative steps, thus out method is very efﬁcient.
Honestly, our method is partially inspired by the works of [5, 10, 25, 26].
In the work of [5, 10, 25], a cascade adaptive cost volume is presented. In comparison, we fur-ther narrow the size of cost volume and extend this multi-stage strategy to iterative way. Our iterative idea is also in-spired by the recent optical estimation work [26]. Compare with [26], we give up the full-size static correlation volume, cause it is not memory friendly. More importantly, different from optical ﬂow estimation, we utilize a lightweight 3D
CNN to estimate a coarse depth map as the initialization of
GRU, which we ﬁnd is important to the fast convergence of GRUs on MVS. In addition, due to the 3D CNN is very light, it affects the efﬁciency slightly.
In conclusion, our contributions can be summarized as: 1) We propose a novel dynamic cost volume, which is very lightweight and could be processed by 2D convolution based GRU iteratively. In this way, we avoid the mem-ory and time consuming problem of large size static cost volume. 2) We present a cascade and hierarchical reﬁnement archi-tecture to utilize the multi-scale information and speed up the convergence. Speciﬁcally, with a lightweight 3D
CNN, we give a reliable initialization for GRUs, which is critical to fast convergence and ﬁnal performance. 3) Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance in terms of accuracy, inference speed and GPU memory consumption (cf . Fig. 1). As for the accuracy, our method achieves the best results on DTU [1] and ad-vanced sequence of Tanks & Temples dataset [13]. More importantly, with the less memory consumption, our method is 2 times faster than the runner-up. 2.