Abstract
A novel algorithm to detect road lanes in the eigen-lane space is proposed in this paper. First, we introduce the notion of eigenlanes, which are data-driven descriptors for structurally diverse lanes, including curved, as well as straight, lanes. To obtain eigenlanes, we perform the best rank-M approximation of a lane matrix containing all lanes in a training set. Second, we generate a set of lane candi-dates by clustering the training lanes in the eigenlane space.
Third, using the lane candidates, we determine an optimal set of lanes by developing an anchor-based detection net-work, called SIIC-Net. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm provides excellent detection performance for structurally diverse lanes. Our codes are available at https://github.com/dongkwonjin/Eigenlanes. 1.

Introduction
Lane detection is essential for understanding driving en-vironments, in which autonomous or human drivers should abide by trafﬁc rules. To control vehicle maneuvers, bound-aries of road lanes and sidewalks should be detected reli-ably. There are various challenging factors to interfere with the detection of those lanes. For example, lanes may be un-obvious or even invisible due to weather and illumination conditions or due to the occlusion by nearby vehicles, as illustrated in Figure 1(a).
For lane detection, traditional methods extract hand-crafted features, such as image gradients or color features
[2, 10, 11, 35]. This feature engineering may fail to discrim-inate actual lanes from noisy ones. Recently, various CNN-based techniques have been developed to detect lanes in real environments more reliably. Most such techniques adopt the semantic segmentation framework [5, 12, 13, 21, 22, 34], in which each pixel in an image is dichotomized into either lane or no-lane category. To preserve continuous lane struc-ture in detection results, several attempts have been made, including curve ﬁtting [21], polynomial regression [32], and adversarial training [5]. However, even these algorithms may fail to detect less visible lanes in cluttered scenes, (a) (b)
Figure 1. There are two challenging factors in lane detection. First, in (a), lanes may be implicit due to adverse weather conditions or occlusion by nearby vehicles. Second, in (b), it is difﬁcult to design lane anchors due to the structural diversity of lanes. The ground-truth lanes are shown in cyan within the insets. because they use only local features and may miss parts of lanes. Meanwhile, the anchor-based detection frame-work, which has been used extensively in object detec-tion [15, 20, 27, 28], has been recently adopted for lane de-tection [18, 30]. These anchor-based algorithms consider straight lines as anchors (or lane candidates). Then, they declare each anchor as a lane or not. By exploiting long-range contextual information, they can detect implied lanes effectively. However, because of the straight lane assump-tion, it may not deal with complicated lanes, such as curved and winding ones in Figure 1(b).
In this paper, we propose a novel algorithm to detect structurally diverse road lanes in the eigenlane space. It en-ables to process curved, as well as straight, lanes reliably in the anchor-based detection framework. First, we introduce the notion of eigenlanes, which are data-driven lane descrip-tors. To obtain eigenlanes, we approximate a lane matrix, which contains all lanes in a training set, based on the low-rank approximation property of singular value decomposi-tion (SVD) [4]. Then, each lane is represented by a linear combination of M eigenlanes. Second, we generate a set of lane candidates, including complicated and curved ones, by clustering the training lanes in the eigenlane space. Third, we develop an anchor-based detector, called SIIC-Net, to detect lanes from the candidates. It consists of two modules:
self-lane identiﬁcation (SI) module and inter-lane correla-tion (IC) module. SI computes the classiﬁcation probability and regression offset of each candidate, while IC estimates the compatibility between each pair of lanes. Extensive ex-periments show that the proposed algorithm provides com-petitive results on existing datasets [1, 22] and outperforms the state-of-the-art techniques [30, 34] on a new dataset, called SDLane, containing structurally more diverse lanes.
This work has the following major contributions:
• We propose the notion of eigenlanes, which are data-driven lane descriptors, to represent structurally di-verse lanes compactly in the eigenlane space.
• We develop SIIC-Net to detect and regress road lanes
It in the eigenlane space effectively and efﬁciently. yields outstanding performances on various datasets.
• We construct the SDLane dataset to represent struc-turally diverse and complicated lanes in real driving environments more faithfully than the existing datasets do.1 2.