Abstract
Current methods of multi-person pose estimation typi-cally treat the localization and association of body joints separately. In this paper, we propose the ﬁrst fully end-to-end multi-person Pose Estimation framework with TRans-formers, termed PETR. Our method views pose estimation as a hierarchical set prediction problem and effectively re-moves the need for many hand-crafted modules like RoI cropping, NMS and grouping post-processing.
In PETR, multiple pose queries are learned to directly reason a set of full-body poses. Then a joint decoder is utilized to fur-ther reﬁne the poses by exploring the kinematic relations between body joints. With the attention mechanism, the proposed method is able to adaptively attend to the fea-tures most relevant to target keypoints, which largely over-comes the feature misalignment difﬁculty in pose estimation and improves the performance considerably. Extensive ex-periments on the MS COCO and CrowdPose benchmarks show that PETR plays favorably against state-of-the-art ap-proaches in terms of both accuracy and efﬁciency. The code and models are available at https://github.com/ hikvision-research/opera. 1.

Introduction
Multi-person pose estimation (aka, keypoint detection) aims to detect all the instances and identify the kinematic joints of each person simultaneously.
It is one of the fundamental computer vision tasks and has a wide range of applications such as action recognition [9], human-computer interaction [15], pedestrian tracking [1, 31] and re-identiﬁcation [22], etc.
Existing mainstream methods solve this challenging task with two-stage frameworks, including top-down and bottom-up approaches. Top-down methods [5, 10, 12, 33, 39], as illustrated in Figure 1a, ﬁrst detect each individual by a person detector and then transfer the task to a sim-*Co-ﬁrst authors. †Corresponding author.
SPPE
SPPE merging (a) Top-down framework.
Grouping (b) Bottom-up framework.
Encoder
.
.
.
Decoder
.
.
. (c) Fully end-to-end framework.
Figure 1. Comparison of mainstream pose estimation frame-works. SPPE in (a) indicates single-person pose estimation. We proposed a fully end-to-end framework as show in (c). pler single-person pose estimation problem. The top-down pipeline comes with the following drawbacks: 1) the pose estimation accuracy heavily relies on the performance of person detector, incurring inferior performance in complex scenarios [7]; 2) the computational cost is expensive due to the use of the isolated detector [26, 32] and the running time depends on the number of instances in the image. On the other hand, bottom-up methods [3, 17, 27, 30] (shown in
Figure 1b) ﬁrst detect all potential keypoints in the image in an instance-agnostic manner, and then perform a group-ing post-processing to get instance-aware full-body poses.
The grouping process is usually heuristic, hand-crafted and
Framework
Two-stage
Top-down
Bottom-up
Single-stage
Non end-to-end
Fully end-to-end
RoI-free Grouping-free NMS-free (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
Table 1. Comparison of pose estimation frameworks. cumbersome [27], involving several hyper-parameters and tricks. These kinds of methods split the pose estimation problem into two steps and are often not optimized in a fully end-to-end fashion.
Recently, there has been a great interest to directly es-timate multi-person poses from the input image in a sin-gle stage [26, 29, 32, 34, 36, 41]. SPM [29] propose a structured pose representation that uniﬁes person instance and body joint position representations and simpliﬁes the multi-person pose estimation pipeline. FCPose [26] and In-sPose [32] propose a fully convolutional multi-person pose estimation framework using dynamic instance-aware con-volutions, which is compact and efﬁcient. These methods eliminate the need for RoI (Region of Interest) cropping and keypoint grouping post-processing and achieve a good trade-off between accuracy and efﬁciency. However, they still rely on “taking-peak” on the heatmap [29, 41] or score map [26, 32] and hand-crafted NMS (Non-Maximum Sup-pression) post-processing [26, 32, 36], which are still not end-to-end optimized.
Inspired by the paradigm emerged in object detection
[4, 42], we present a fully end-to-end multi-person pose es-timation framework (Sec. 3.1) with transformers, termed
PETR. The proposed method uniﬁes person instance and
ﬁne-grained body joint localization by formulating pose es-timation as a hierarchical set prediction problem. Given multiple randomly initialized pose queries, a pose decoder (Sec. 3.3) learns to reason about the relations of objects [14] and estimate a set of instance-aware poses under the global image context. Then, a joint decoder (Sec. 3.4) is designed to explore the structured relations between different joints and further optimize the full-body poses at a ﬁner level.
Compared with existing single-stage methods, PETR could hierarchically attend to the features most relevant to target keypoints, largely overcomes the feature misalignment is-sue [11, 34] and improves the performance considerably.
Our end-to-end query-based framework is learned via the bipartite matching strategy that avoids the heuristic label as-signment and eliminates the need for NMS post-processing.
We illustrate and compare the mainstream pose estima-tion frameworks in Figure 1 and Table 1. The main contri-butions of this work are summarized as follows.
• We propose the ﬁrst fully end-to-end learning frame-work for multi-person pose estimation. The proposed
PETR method directly predicts instance-aware full-body poses and eliminates the need for RoI cropping, grouping, and NMS post-processings.
• We design hierarchical decoders to deal with the fea-ture misalignment issue, and capture both relations be-tween person instances and kinematic joints by the at-tention mechanism.
• PETR surpasses all single-stage and bottom-up meth-ods and is comparable to top-down methods on COCO dataset. Besides, PETR performs well in crowded scenes and establishes a new state of the art on Crowd-Pose dataset. 2.