Abstract
Existing face forgery detectors mainly focus on speciﬁc forgery patterns like noise characteristics, local textures, or frequency statistics for forgery detection. This causes spe-cialization of learned representations to known forgery pat-terns presented in the training set, and makes it difﬁcult to detect forgeries with unknown patterns. In this paper, from a new perspective, we propose a forgery detection frame-work emphasizing the common compact representations of genuine faces based on reconstruction-classiﬁcation learn-ing. Reconstruction learning over real images enhances the learned representations to be aware of forgery patterns that are even unknown, while classiﬁcation learning takes the charge of mining the essential discrepancy between real and fake images, facilitating the understanding of forgeries. To achieve better representations, instead of only using the en-coder in reconstruction learning, we build bipartite graphs over the encoder and decoder features in a multi-scale fash-ion. We further exploit the reconstruction difference as guidance of forgery traces on the graph output as the ﬁnal representation, which is fed into the classiﬁer for forgery detection. The reconstruction and classiﬁcation learning is optimized end-to-end. Extensive experiments on large-scale benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of the pro-posed method over state of the arts. 1.

Introduction
The recent years have witnessed the considerable progress of face forgery generation methods [2,4,11,18,20, 41, 42, 50, 53]. Owing to the success of deep learning, gen-erating ultra-realistic fake facial images or videos is really easy. An attacker can take advantage of these techniques to make fake news, defame celebrities, or break authentica-tion, leading to serious political, social, and security conse-quences [27]. To mitigate malicious abuse of face forgery, it is urgent to develop effective detection methods.
* Corresponding author.
Figure 1. We perform reconstruction learning over only genuine samples to learn the common compact representations of real fa-cial images (left). With the learned representations, the recon-struction difference of real and fake faces signiﬁcantly differs in distribution (right), which facilitates forgery detection.
Early face forgery detection methods [1, 8, 23, 31, 35, 60] typically follow the classic pipeline of learning convolu-tional neural networks (CNN) for image classiﬁcation. With off-the-shelf CNN backbones, these methods directly take a facial image as input and then classify it as real or fake.
However, these vanilla CNNs tend to seek forgeries on a limited region of faces, indicating that the detectors are short of the understanding of forgery [45]. Recent works resort to speciﬁc forgery patterns such as noise characteris-tics [12, 58], local textures [6, 14, 55], and frequency infor-mation [22, 33] to better detect forgery artifacts that resided in fake faces. Despite the demonstrated promising results, they always rely on forgery patterns that are possessed by a certain manipulation technique presented in the training set.
Thus, in the real-world scenario, due to the emergence of new manipulation techniques and various types of perturba-tions, forgeries with unknown patterns easily cause existing methods to fail.
To address the above issues, we have two major con-siderations to enhance the learned representations for face forgery detection. First, for learning representations that can generalize to unknown forgery patterns, exploring the common characteristics of genuine faces is more suitable than overﬁtting to speciﬁc forgery patterns presented in the training set. As previous studies [5, 36] indicate that real samples possess a relatively compact distribution, the
compact representations learned with real images are more likely to distinguish unknown forgery patterns from genuine faces. Second, to ensure that the learned representations capture the essential discrepancy between real and fake im-ages, it is desirable to enhance the network reasoning about forgery cues. As such, classiﬁcation learning provides a better understanding of forgeries from a global perspective.
With the above considerations in mind, in this paper, we present a novel reconstruction-classiﬁcation learning (RECCE) framework to detect face forgeries. The key idea of which is illustrated in Figure 1. For reconstruction learn-ing, we propose a reconstruction network, which consists of an encoder and a decoder, to model the distributions of only real faces. Besides the reconstruction loss, we apply a metric-learning loss on the decoder to make real images close, while real and fake images far away, in the embed-ding space. This ensures that fake images with unknown forgery patterns are more likely to be recognized due to the learned distributional discrepancy.
Based on the above constraints, the discrepancy informa-tion which reveals forgery cues is progressively strength-ened at the decoder side, ﬁnally resulting in sound recon-struction for real faces and poor reconstruction for fake im-ages. Thus, to achieve complete representations, instead of using merely the encoder output as features, we also
Inspired by the recent ad-consider the decoder features. vances in graph modeling [44, 47, 56] which can model the feature relationship ﬂexibly and adaptively, we build bipar-tite graphs over the encoder and decoder features to reason about forgery cues captured by decoder features. Since dif-ferent face forgery techniques result in forged traces across various scales, we adopt the multi-scale mechanism dur-ing the reasoning process to mine the forgery clues com-prehensively. Furthermore, in view of that the reconstruc-tion difference indicates probably forged regions, we use the reconstruction difference as guidance to attend to the graph output as the ﬁnal representations for classiﬁcation learning. The reconstruction and classiﬁcation learning are jointly optimized in an end-to-end manner.
In brief, the main contributions are as follows:
• From a new perspective, we propose the RECCE framework for face forgery detection which mines the common features of genuine faces. This enhances the learned representations able to separate fake faces even with unknown forgery patterns from real images.
• We build bipartite graphs over the encoder output and decoder features in a multi-scale fashion to help the network reason about forgery clues and exploit the re-construction difference as guidance to attend to proba-bly forged traces.
• Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets, includ-ing FaceForensics++ [35], WildDeepfake [60], and
DFDC [9], validate the superiority of the proposed method over the state-of-the-art approaches. 2.