Abstract
In this paper, a computation efficient regression frame-work is presented for estimating the 6D pose of rigid objects from a single RGB-D image, which is applica-ble to handling symmetric objects.
This framework is designed in a simple architecture that efficiently extracts point-wise features from RGB-D data using a fully con-volutional network, called XYZNet, and directly regresses the 6D pose without any post refinement.
In the case of symmetric object, one object has multiple ground-truth poses, and this one-to-many relationship may lead to esti-In order to solve this ambiguity prob-mation ambiguity. lem, we design a symmetry-invariant pose distance metric, called average (maximum) grouped primitives distance or
A(M)GPD. The proposed A(M)GPD loss can make the re-gression network converge to the correct state, i.e., all min-ima in the A(M)GPD loss surface are mapped to the cor-rect poses. Extensive experiments on YCB-Video and T-LESS datasets demonstrate the proposed framework’s sub-stantially superior performance in top accuracy and low computational cost.
The relevant code is available in https://github.com/GANWANSHUI/ES6D.git.
Figure 1. Comparison of A(M)GPD and ADD-S. Axis X shows the rotation angle of the object (from 0° to 360°). Axis Y shows the calculated distance. We set the initial pose as the ground truth.
As we can see, all minima are mapped to correct poses in the
A(M)GPD curve and several minima point to incorrect poses in the ADD-S curve. 1.

Introduction
Estimating the 6D object pose is important for real-time applications such as augmented reality (AR) [24], au-In recent tonomous driving [3, 8], and robotics [4, 34]. years, methods based on the deep neural network (DNN) have gradually emerged [17, 22, 25, 26, 40]. The RGB-D-based method [35] fuses RGB features and point cloud fea-*The first two authors contributed equally and should be regarded as co-first authors.
†Corresponding author. tures and shows exceptional robustness in handling heavy occlusion and textureless situations. However, as discussed below, regression methods [35, 38] will fail for some sym-metric objects and its computational cost is still an obsta-cle for real-time application. In this paper, we propose a
RGB-D-based 6D pose regression framework that is more computation efficient and applicable to symmetric objects.
Feature extraction from RGB-D data is a crucial part of our framework. The methods in [12, 19, 35] obtain robust features through a dense fusion network, which fuses RGB
and point cloud features with an indexing operation. How-ever, an efficient network should avoid random memory ac-cesses [23], which is the computational bottleneck of the dense fusion network in [12,35]. For efficiency and simplic-ity, a fully convolutional feature extraction network, named
XYZNet, is proposed in this paper. XYZNet is much more efficient than the heterogeneous structure in [35] and [12].
The depth image is converted to the XYZ map, which is strictly aligned with the RGB image, as shown in Figure 2. Therefore, the local features from RGB and the point cloud can be simultaneously extracted with a 2D convolu-tional kernel. Unlike the RGB-D-based method in [21], the
XYZ map is propagated to the rear layer to retain the spa-tial information of the local features. Then, a CNN-based
PointNet [28] module is utilized to encode the point cloud with local features. Finally, the different modality features are aggregated. The experimental results reveal the superi-ority of the proposed XYZNet.
In addition, learning-based manners easily fail toward the symmetric object. To explain this problem, we model the network training of 6D pose estimation as minimizing the following loss: l = loss(p, ˆp) = loss(N (I, w), ˆp), (1) where p is the estimated pose from network N (I, w), ˆp is the ground truth, I represents the input image, and w de-notes the parameters of the network. The essence of the training is constantly adjusting the parameters of the net-work to the direction of the gradient of loss(p, ˆp). Finally, the network will converge to the global or local minimum in the loss landscape. A symmetric object O has several ground truths S(O) = {ˆp1, ˆp2, . . . , ˆpk}, which are called proper symmetries of the object O [1]. Typically, when us-ing L1 loss to train the neural network of object O, it would converge to the state that predicts the average of S(O), which is mapped to the minimum of the L1 loss surface.
However, the average of S(O) is meaningless.
To avoid this problem, the loss function should satisfy two requirements: (1) all minima in the loss surface are mapped to the correct poses; and (2) the loss function is continuous, as Deep Networks can only approximate the continuous functions [9, 18]. ADD-S is widely used as the loss in prior regression frameworks [33, 35, 38, 39] to han-dle symmetries. The ADD-S loss is always continuous but does not satisfy requirement (1) in some cases. As shown in
Figure 1, several local minima in the ADD-S landscape are mapped to incorrect poses because of the particular shape of the objects. The motivation of our solution is to design a novel pose distance metric that is in the 3D metric space (meter, for instance) like ADD-S, and satisfies requirements (1) and (2). To this end, we introduce a novel shape rep-resentation for arbitrary objects named grouped primitives (GP). The GP is only associated with the proper symmetries
S(O) and ignores the details of the shape. Then, we di-vide symmetric objects into five categories and give the cor-responding distance metric called the average (maximum) grouped primitives distance, or A(M)GPD. For typical sym-metric objects, the validity of A(M)GPD is verified by a nu-merical and visualization method.
We evaluate the proposed framework on the YCB-Video
[38] and T-LESS datasets [15] and demonstrate its superior-ity by taking into account the trade-off between speed and accuracy. In summary, the main contributions of this work are as follows.
• We propose a novel feature extraction network
XYZNet for the RGB-D data, which is suitable for pose estimation with low computational cost and su-perior performance.
• The compact shape representation GP and the distance metric A(M)GPD are introduced to handle symme-tries. The loss based on A(M)GPD can constrain the regression network to converge to the correct state.
• A numerical simulation and visualization method is carried out to analyze the validity of the A(M)GPD loss. This analytical method is applicable to other frameworks in 6D pose estimation.
• The framework ES6D is proposed by using XYZNet and the A(M)GPD loss and achieves competitive per-formance on the YCB-Video and T-LESS datasets. 2.