Abstract
Image denoising has achieved unprecedented progress as great efforts have been made to exploit effective deep denoisers. To improve the denoising performance in real-world, two typical solutions are used in recent trends: de-vising better noise models for the synthesis of more realistic training data, and estimating noise level function to guide non-blind denoisers. In this work, we combine both noise modeling and estimation, and propose an innovative noise model estimation and noise synthesis pipeline for realistic noisy image generation. Specifically, our model learns a noise estimation model with fine-grained statistical noise model in a contrastive manner. Then, we use the estimated noise parameters to model camera-specific noise distribu-tion, and synthesize realistic noisy training data. The most striking thing for our work is that by calibrating noise mod-els of several sensors, our model can be extended to predict other cameras. In other words, we can estimate camera-specific noise models for unknown sensors with only test-ing images, without laborious calibration frames or paired noisy/clean data. The proposed pipeline endows deep de-noisers with competitive performances with state-of-the-art real noise modeling methods. 1.

Introduction low-level vision.
Image denoising is a fundamental and significant prob-lem in the community of
Taking the advantage of powerful deep learning tools, previous works [40, 48, 49] have achieved nearly perfect perfor-mances removing noise under Additive White Gaussian
Noise (AWGN) assumption. However, the denoising results on real photographs from consumer-level cameras and mo-bile devices are less satisfying [2,10,37]. This phenomenon is mainly due to the distribution discrepancy between the noise assumption and real sensor noise distribution, which brings large domain gap between training and testing data.
To this end, more researchers are dedicated to real noise re-moval [1, 5, 12, 18, 46, 51]. There are mainly two significant issues to be solved for real image denoising.
∗Corresponding Author: fuying@bit.edu.cn
A straightforward way is to model real sensor noise dis-tributions and generate more realistic data [1,9,12,22,42,45, 50]. Some methods present statistical models to mimic real noise formation, they generally calibrate camera-specific noise parameters (e.g., noise variance) from specially cap-tured frames and then generate training data. In this way, deep networks benefit from more realistic training data. Sta-tistical noise models, including AWGN, Poisson-Guassian (P-G, [15]) model, Poisson Mixture model [47], etc., are commonly used in the early exploration of noise models.
Recently, some noise modeling literatures based on deep generative models like GAN [9, 12, 22, 45] and Normaliz-ing Flow [1] have emerged, but fail in the competition with more fine-grained statistical noise model [42, 50] with care-fully calibrated noise parameters. A limitation for noise modeling methods is that they depend on real calibration frames or noisy/clean pairs of certain camera, which is la-borious or unreachable in some scenarios.
Another important issue is noise estimation. Noise level functions are usually served as guidance for both filter based denoising approaches [6, 14] and deep learning based de-noising networks [49]. Recently, there are several attempts to estimate noise level functions, based on both computa-tion [11, 16, 28–31, 38, 52] or deep learning [7, 8, 18, 43, 49].
Nevertheless, these methods are built upon inferior noise models like AWGN, and cannot be used for the estimation of more complex sensor noise corrupted by circuit readout pattern or source follower. Moreover, existing noise esti-mation methods basically serve the estimated parameters as an inference input value and feed them into denoising fil-ters [14] or end-to-end deep neural networks [18]. They have not ever tried to exploit more intrinsic attributes of the camera sensor through these parameters.
In this paper, we propose a novel noise model estima-tion and noise synthesis pipeline to estimate parameters for fine-grained noise models using only testing data, liberating us from the laborious or unreachable calibration for image sensor. To achieve this, we present a contrastive noise es-timation model to estimate noise parameters from a single image under fine-grained noise model. Our contrastive es-timation framework separates each noise component, and well approximates noise parameters of a single image, even
if the camera for taking pictures has never been seen by the model. Then, with the estimated parameters, we are capa-ble to estimate the intrinsic joint distribution of an unknown sensor under state-of-the-art physical noise model. As a re-sult, we apply our pipeline to real image denoising and fa-cilitate the training process by synthesizing more realistic data. Our new camera-specific noise synthesis pipeline re-lieve the dependencies on sophisticated capturing scheme and generate promising synthetic noisy images. The main contributions of our work can be summarized as follows: 1. We present a novel noise model estimation and realis-tic noise synthesis pipeline, which can estimate cam-era noise model only from testing data without any camera-specific training data. 2. We employ a noise estimation framework based on contrastive learning, which well approximates param-eters for fine-grained noise model. 3. With our realistic noise synthesis pipeline, deep de-noisers can reach competitive results with previ-ous noise generation methods which depend on real noisy/clean images or calibration frames. 2.