Abstract
Waste inspection for packaged waste is an important step in the pipeline of waste disposal. Previous methods either rely on manual visual checking or RGB image-based in-spection algorithm, requiring costly preparation procedures (e.g., open the bag and spread the waste items). More-over, occluded items are very likely to be left out. Inspired by the fact that X-ray has a strong penetrating power to see through the bag and overlapping objects, we propose to perform waste inspection efficiently using X-ray images without the need to open the bag. We introduce a novel problem of instance-level waste segmentation in X-ray im-age for intelligent waste inspection, and contribute a real dataset consisting of 5,038 X-ray images (totally 30,881 waste items) with high-quality annotations (i.e., waste cate-gories, object boxes, and instance-level masks) as a bench-mark for this problem. As existing segmentation methods are mainly designed for natural images and cannot take ad-vantage of the characteristics of X-ray waste images (e.g., heavy occlusions and penetration effect), we propose a new instance segmentation method to explicitly take these im-age characteristics into account. Specifically, our method adopts an easy-to-hard disassembling strategy to use high confidence predictions to guide the segmentation of highly overlapped objects, and a global structure guidance module to better capture the complex contour information caused by the penetration effect. Extensive experiments demon-strate the effectiveness of the proposed method. Our dataset is released at WIXRayNet. 1.

Introduction
Nowadays, people produce an increasing amount of waste world-widely, which leads to great pressure for waste
*corresponding author, hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn
Figure 1. A closed waste bag is being scanned by an X-ray ma-chine (left), producing the corresponding X-ray image (mid). The contained waste items can be clearly seen from this image. The figure at the right is the instance-level mask prediction of our method for this X-ray image (best viewed in color) disposal.
Improper disposal could bring irreversible dis-asters to our ecosystem, including climate warming, soil contamination, marine pollution, and so on. To reduce the harmful impact caused by the increasing amount of waste, it is urgent to develop an effective solution for proper waste disposal. In the pipeline of waste disposal, inspection for packaged garbage is a very important step as it can iden-tify the categories and locations of waste items in the bag, providing useful information for the following processes. In the past, waste inspection is usually done by human workers manually with low efficiency. And such close contact with unknown waste increases the health risk to human workers.
To improve the efficiency and reduce human contact with harmful waste, some researchers propose to use computer vision methods (e.g., object detection) to identify misplaced waste items using RGB images [11, 28, 34, 40]. However, both the manual method and RGB image-based methods re-quire garbage bags to be opened and waste items to be well-spread, bringing in costly preparation procedures. Also, it is unlikely for these methods to identify heavily occluded waste items.
Fortunately, we observed that X-rays have strong pene-trating power that even completely occluded or buried ob-1
jects can be well-imaged by X-ray scanning, as shown in
Fig. 1. Compared with natural images, X-ray images have distinct characteristics (see Tab. 1). First, as different mate-rials absorb X-ray in different degrees, the colors in X-ray images indicate the thickness and the material type of the corresponding areas. Second, the edge information of all objects are well preserved even though they are occluded.
These nice characteristics make it possible to inspect all waste items in packaged waste from a single X-ray image without opening the bag.
This observation motivates us to perform waste inspec-tion efficiently using X-ray images, such that the whole pipeline of waste disposal can be simplified. In this work, we introduce a novel problem of instance-level waste seg-mentation in X-ray images to facilitate intelligent waste in-spection. Although there are some existing methods using
X-ray images for object inspection [1, 2, 27, 48, 45], they mainly focus on security inspection, where the goal is to de-tect prohibited items hidden in common objects. In contrast, we target predicting waste category and pixel-level mask for each waste item in X-ray image to allow a more fine-grained inspection.
As no off-the-shelf dataset is available, we contribute the first high-quality X-ray waste inspection dataset collected in campus community, named Waste Inspection X-ray Dataset (WIXray), for this problem. According to the current waste disposal scenario [29], we divide the common waste items into twelve categories, namely, PlasticBottle, Can, Car-ton, GlassBottle, Stick, Tableware, FoodWaste, HeatingPad,
Desiccant, MealBox, Battery, and Bulb. Our dataset con-tains 5, 038 annotated X-ray images and each image con-tains 6.13 labeled instances on average. Sample X-ray im-age with annotations is shown in Fig. 2.
Since the imaging mechanism of X-ray images is largely different from natural images, directly applying existing methods designed for natural images [19] on this problem leads to decreased performance. Therefore, we propose an
Easy-to-Hard Instance Segmentation Network (ETHSeg) for X-ray inspection. First, our method adopts an easy-to-hard disassembling strategy that uses high-confidence instance predictions to guide the segmentation of hard in-stances in the highly overlapped regions. Second, a global structure guidance module is introduced to better capture the complex global contour information for mask predic-tion. Our carefully designed ETHSeg achieves much higher accuracy for X-ray waste instance segmentation.
The main contributions of this work are as follows:
• We introduce a new task of instance-level waste seg-mentation in X-ray images to promote the develop-ment of the intelligent waste inspection algorithm.
• We contribute an X-ray image dataset with high-quality bounding boxes and instance masks annotation as a benchmark for waste inspection. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first labeled X-ray dataset for this problem.
• We propose a new instance segmentation method that explicitly considers the occlusion and penetration ef-fect of the X-ray image for accurate mask prediction.
Extensive experiments verify the effectiveness of our method. 2.