Abstract
Modern object detectors have achieved impressive progress under the close-set setup. However, open-set ob-ject detection (OSOD) remains challenging since objects of unknown categories are often misclassified to existing known classes.
In this work, we propose to identify un-known objects by separating high/low-density regions in the latent space, based on the consensus that unknown objects are usually distributed in low-density latent regions. As traditional threshold-based methods only maintain limited low-density regions, which cannot cover all unknown ob-jects, we present a novel Open-set Detector (OpenDet) with expanded low-density regions. To this aim, we equip Open-Det with two learners, Contrastive Feature Learner (CFL) and Unknown Probability Learner (UPL). CFL performs instance-level contrastive learning to encourage compact features of known classes, leaving more low-density re-gions for unknown classes; UPL optimizes unknown prob-ability based on the uncertainty of predictions, which fur-ther divides more low-density regions around the cluster of known classes. Thus, unknown objects in low-density regions can be easily identified with the learned unknown probability. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method can significantly improve the OSOD performance, e.g., OpenDet reduces the Absolute Open-Set Errors by 25%-35% on six OSOD benchmarks. Code is available at: https://github.com/csuhan/opendet2. 1.

Introduction
Although the past decade has witnessed significant progress in object detection [3, 17, 29, 37, 39, 45], mod-ern object detectors are often developed with a close-set as-∗ Work done during internship at Tencent YouTu Lab.
† Corresponding author.
Figure 1. Trained on close-set images, (a) threshold-based meth-ods, e.g., Faster R-CNN, usually misclassify unknown objects (black triangles, e.g. zebra) into known classes (colored dots, e.g. horse) due to limited low-density regions (in gray color). (b) Our method identifies unknown objects by expanding low-density re-gions. We encourage compact proposal features and learn clear separation between known and unknown classes. sumption that the object categories appearing in the testing process are contained by the training sets, and quickly lose their efficiency when handling real-world scenarios as many objects categories have never been seen in the training. See
Fig. 1 for an instance, where a representative object detec-tor, i.e., Faster R-CNN [39] trained on PASCAL VOC [14], misclassifies zebra into horse with high confidence, as the new class zebra is not contained by PASCAL VOC.
To alleviate this issue, Open-Set Object Detection (OSOD) has been recently investigated, where the detector trained on close-set datasets is asked to detect all known objects and identify unknown objects in open-set conditions.
OSOD can be seen as an extension of Open-Set Recogni-tion (OSR) [40]. Although OSR has been extensively stud-ied [2, 7, 16, 40, 51, 53], rare works attempted to solve the challenging OSOD. Dhamija et al. [12] first bench-marked the open-set performance of some representative methods [29, 37, 39], which indicates most detectors are overestimated in open-set conditions. Miller et al. [32, 33] adopt dropout sampling [15] to improve the robustness of
Joseph et al. [23] pro-detectors in open-set conditions. posed an energy-based unknown identifier by fitting the en-ergy distributions of known and unknown classes. In sum-mary, prior works usually leverage hidden evidence (e.g., the output logits) of pre-trained models as unknown indica-tors, with the cost of additional training step and complex post-processing. Can we train an open-set detector with only close-set data, and directly apply it to open-set envi-ronments without complex post-processing?
We draw inspiration from the consensus that known ob-jects are usually clustered to form high-density regions in the latent space, while unknown objects (or novel patterns) are distributed in low-density regions [5, 18, 38]. From this perspective, proper separation of high/low-density latent re-gions is crucial for unknown identification. However, tra-ditional methods, e.g., hard-thresholding (Fig. 1 (a)), only maintain limited low-density regions, as higher thresholds will hinder the close-set accuracy. In this work, we propose to identify unknown objects by expanding low-density la-tent regions (Fig. 1 (b)). Firstly, we learn compact features of known classes, leaving more low-density regions for un-known classes. Then, we learn an unknown probability for each instance, which serves as a threshold to divide more low-density regions around the cluster of known classes.
Finally, unknown objects distributed in these regions can be easily identified.
More specifically, we propose an Open-set Detector (OpenDet) with two learners, Contrastive Feature Learner (CFL) and Unknown Probability Learner (UPL), which ex-pands low-density regions from two folds. Let us denote the latent space with Ω = ΩK ∪ ΩU , where ΩK and ΩU represent high/low-density sub-space, respectively. CFL performs instance-level contrastive learning to encourage intra-class compactness and inter-class separation of known classes, which expands ΩU by narrowing ΩK. UPL learns unknown probability for each instance based on the uncer-tainty of predictions. As we carefully optimize UPL to maintain the close-set accuracy, the learned unknown prob-ability can serve as a threshold to divide more ΩU around
ΩK. In the testing phase, we directly classify an instance into the unknown class if its unknown probability is the largest among all classes.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, we take PASCAL VOC [14] for close-set training and con-struct several open-set settings considering both VOC and
COCO [30]. Compared with previous methods, Open-Det shows significant improvements on all open-set metrics without compromising the close-set accuracy. For example,
OpenDet reduces the Absolute Open-Set Errors (introduced in Sec. 4.1) by 25%-35% on six open-set settings. We also visualize the latent feature in Fig. 2, where OpenDet learns clear separation between known and unknown classes. Be-sides, we conduct extensive ablation experiments to analyze
Figure 2. t-SNE visualization of latent features. We take VOC classes as known classes (colored dots), and non-VOC classes in
COCO as unknown classes (black triangles). Our method learns a clear separation between known and unknown classes. the effect of our main components and core design choices.
Furthermore, we show that OpenDet can be easily extended to one-stage detectors and achieve satisfactory results. We summarize our contributions as:
• To our best knowledge, we are the first to solve the chal-lenging OSOD by modeling low-density latent regions.
• We present a novel Open-set Detector (OpenDet) with two well-designed learners, CFL and UPL, which can be trained in an end-to-end manner and directly applied to open-set environments.
• We introduce a new OSOD benchmark. Compared with previous methods, OpenDet shows significant improve-ments on all open-set metrics, e.g., OpenDet reduces the
Absolute Open-Set Errors by 25%-35%. 2.