Abstract for HOI detection.
Recent high-performing Human-Object
Interaction (HOI) detection techniques have been highly influenced by Transformer-based object detector (i.e., DETR). Never-theless, most of them directly map parametric interaction queries into a set of HOI predictions through vanilla
Transformer in a one-stage manner. This leaves rich inter-or intra-interaction structure under-exploited. In this work, we design a novel Transformer-style HOI detector, i.e.,
Structure-aware Transformer over Interaction Proposals (STIP),
Such design decomposes the process of HOI set prediction into two subsequent phases, i.e., an interaction proposal generation is first performed, and then followed by transforming the non-parametric interaction proposals into HOI predictions via a structure-aware Transformer. The structure-aware
Transformer upgrades vanilla Transformer by encoding additionally the holistically semantic structure among interaction proposals as well as the locally spatial struc-ture of human/object within each interaction proposal, so as to strengthen HOI predictions. Extensive experiments conducted on V-COCO and HICO-DET benchmarks have demonstrated the effectiveness of STIP, and superior results are reported when comparing with the state-of-the-art HOI detectors.
Source code is available at https://github.com/zyong812/STIP. 1.

Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection [5, 11] is intended to localize the interactive human-object pairs within an image and identify the interactions in be-tween, yielding the HOI predictions in the form of
⟨human, object, interaction⟩ triplets. Practical HOI de-tection systems perform the human-centric scene under-∗This work was performed at JD Explore Academy.
Figure 1. Comparison between existing Transformer-style HOI detectors and our STIP. (a) Existing Transformer-style HOI de-tectors directly transform the parametric interaction queries into
HOI predictions via vanilla Transformer in a one-stage fashion. (b)
STIP adopts a two-phase solution, i.e., first producing interaction proposals via Interaction Proposal Network, and then mapping the non-parametric interaction queries (i.e., interaction proposals) into
HOI predictions. Both of the inter- and intra-interaction structures derived from interaction proposals are additionally exploited to boost HOI set prediction through a structure-aware Transformer. standing, and thus have a great potential impact for nu-merous applications, such as surveillance event detection
[1, 7] and robot imitation learning [2]. In general, conven-tional HOI detectors [8–10, 16, 24, 27, 32, 38–40] tackle the
HOI set prediction task in an indirect way, by formaliz-ing it as surrogate regression and classification problems for human/object/interaction. Such indirect approach needs a subsequent post-processing by collapsing near-duplicate predictions and heuristic matching [16, 24, 40], and thus cannot be trained in an end-to-end fashion, resulting in a sub-optimal solution. The intent to overcome the prob-lem of sub-optimal solution leads to the development of re-cent state-of-the-art HOI detectors [6, 17, 36, 50] that fol-low the Transformer-based detector of DETR [3] to cast
HOI detection as a direct set prediction problem, and em-brace the “end-to-end” philosophy (Figure 1 (a)). In par-ticular, a vanilla Transformer is commonly utilized to map the parametric interaction queries (i.e., the learnable posi-tional embedding sequence) into a set of HOI predictions in a one-stage manner. However, these HOI detectors start the
HOI set prediction from the parametric interaction queries with randomly initialized embeddings. That is, the corre-spondence between parametric interaction queries and out-put HOIs (commonly assigned by Hungarian algorithm for training) is dynamic in which the interaction query corre-sponding to each target HOI (e.g., “human hold bat”) is un-known at the beginning of HOI set prediction. This can adversely hinder the exploration of prior knowledge (i.e., inter-interaction or intra-interaction structure) which would be very useful for relational reasoning among inter-actions in HOI set prediction.
Specifically, by inter-interaction structure, we refer to the holistic semantic dependencies among HOIs, which can be directly defined by considering whether or not two HOIs share the same human or object. Such structure implies the common sense knowledge that shall facilitate the pre-diction of one HOI by exploiting its semantic dependen-cies against other HOIs. Taking the input image in Figure 1 as an example, the existence of “human wear (baseball) glove” provides strong indication for “(another) human hold bat”. Moreover, the intra-interaction structure can be inter-preted as the local spatial structure for each HOI, i.e., the layout of human and object, which acts as additional prior knowledge to steer model’s attention over image areas for depicting the interaction.
In this work, we design a novel scheme based on
Transformer-style HOI detector, namely Structure-aware
Transformer over Interaction Proposals (STIP). The design innovation is to decompose the one-stage solution of set prediction into two cascaded phases, i.e., first producing the interaction proposals (i.e., the probably interactive human-object pairs) and then performing HOI set prediction based on the interaction proposals (Figure 1 (b)). By taking the in-teraction proposals derived from Interaction Proposal Net-work (IPN) as non-parametric interaction queries, STIP nat-urally triggers the subsequent HOI set prediction with more reasonable interaction queries, leading to static query-HOI correspondence that capable of boosting HOI set prediction.
As a beneficial by-product, the predicted interaction pro-posals offer a fertile ground for constructing a structured understanding across interaction proposals or between hu-man & object within each interaction proposal. A particu-lar form of Transformer, i.e., structure-aware Transformer, is designed accordingly to encode the inter-interaction or intra-interaction structure for enhancing HOI predictions.
In sum, we have made the following contributions: (1)
The proposed two-phase implementation of Transformer-style HOI detector is shown capable of seamless incorpo-ration of potential interactions among HOI proposals to overcome the problem associated with one-stage approach; (2) The exquisitely designed structure-aware Transformer is shown able to facilitate additional exploitation opportunity for utilizing inter-interaction and intra-interaction structure for enhanced performance of the vanilla Transformer; (3)
The proposed structure-aware Transformer approach has been properly analyzed and verified through extensive ex-periments over V-COCO and HICO-DET datasets to val-idate its potential in solving the problems associated with one-stage approach to achieve desirable HOI detection. 2.