Abstract
In dynamic scenes, images often suffer from dynamic blur due to superposition of motions or low signal-noise ratio resulted from quick shutter speed when avoiding mo-tions. Recovering sharp and clean results from the cap-tured images heavily depends on the ability of restoration methods and the quality of the input. Although existing re-search on image restoration focuses on developing models for obtaining better restored results, fewer have studied to evaluate how and which input image leads to superior re-stored quality. In this paper, to better study an image’s po-tential value that can be explored for restoration, we pro-pose a novel concept, referring to image restoration poten-tial (IRP). Specifically, We first establish a dynamic scene imaging dataset containing composite distortions and ap-plied image restoration processes to validate the rationality of the existence to IRP. Based on this dataset, we investigate several properties of IRP and propose a novel deep model to accurately predict IRP values. By gradually distilling and selective fusing the degradation features, the proposed model shows its superiority in IRP prediction. Thanks to the proposed model, we are then able to validate how various image restoration related applications are benefited from
IRP prediction. We show the potential usages of IRP as a filtering principle to select valuable frames, an auxiliary guidance to improve restoration models, and also an indica-tor to optimize camera settings for capturing better images under dynamic scenarios. 1.

Introduction
In real world imaging scenarios with dynamic motions, degradation is a common factor due to moving objects or shaking devices. To avoid blur, the photographer can
*† denotes equal contribution. This work is supported by National Sci-ence Foundation of China under Grant No. U19B2037, 61901384, Natural
Science Basic Research Program of Shaanxi No. 2021JCW-03 and Na-tional Engineering Laboratory for Integrated Aero-Space-Ground-Ocean
Big Data Application Technology. ‡ Corresponding author: Yu Zhu.
Figure 1. We show how the proposed concept IRP differs from the traditional image metric visual quality. Given a sequence of images captured under varying exposures in dynamic scenes (first row), both IQA metric NIQE [23] and human observers favorite either (a) or (b) as relatively good shots, but they do not neces-sarily lead to better restored results (second row). As a compari-son, a perceptually poor image (c) leads to the best restored image quality. The result indicates the necessity of developing the IRP metric which predicts if the restored image quality will be good even before it is processed. All images are processed by the same restoration model MPR [40] to ensure fairness. shorten the exposure time, but result in low illumination re-gions and notorious noises [5, 6, 32]. With varying camera settings, the type of distortion may change, but hardly di-minishes. To alleviate the annoying distortions, different image restoration algorithms are required: one can apply either deblurring approaches to remove motion blur in the image captured from adequate exposure, or denoising meth-ods to alleviate noise artifacts due to shortened exposure.
However, among the noise-blur trade-off, different kinds of distorted input lead to different restored results. Naturally, a question comes up that under the trade-off, which kind of image leads to better restored results? The question is fundamental, yet has not been well investigated in the liter-ature. As far as we know, in order to obtain better restored results, most researches focus on developing restoration al-gorithms [7, 13–15, 39, 40], but few are carried out to eval-uate how and which input images lead to superior restored quality. As restored image quality heavily depends on both restoration models and inputs, in this paper, we propose the concept of image restoration potential (IRP), denoting an inherent image attribute that measures the potential value of an image that can be explored for restoration.
Though intuitively, less distorted images with higher quality lead to better restored results, the quality metric here differs from the widely accepted concept of visual percep-tual quality. As shown in the top row of Figure 1, giving a sequence of images captured in dynamic scene, both im-age quality assessment (IQA) metric NIQE [23] and human observers tend to favorite image (a) or (b) as relatively bet-ter shots, however, these “better” inputs do not necessarily lead to better restored ones. In contrast, a perceptually poor quality image (c) achieves the best restored result, shown in the bottom row. The phenomenon therefore inspired us the necessity of developing the IRP concept. As traditional
IQA metrics [28, 44] aim at measuring image quality at the present view and extracting perceptual features which are adapted to the human visual system (HVS), IRP is proposed to forecast if the restored image quality will be good even before they are processed, and focus more on the degrada-tion that closely relates to the restoration process.
To investigate the proposed IRP, we first established a dynamic scene imaging dataset by simulating 5500 de-graded images captured under various camera settings. We then conducted 4 representative restoration algorithms on each of the images in the dataset, and validated that IRP belonging to an inherent image attribute regardless of how concrete restoration algorithms are applied. We further dig into the distortions that exist in dynamic imaging scenarios including noises, blurriness, and low illumination, and pro-posed a deep model for accurate IRP prediction. By disen-tangling distortion factors and selective fusing degradation features, the proposed model showed its effectiveness in re-vealing image potentials for restoration. Lastly, we applied
IRP prediction to various kinds of applications, including filtering valuable frames in image sequences for efficiently processing, guiding image processing models for adaptive restoration, and optimizing camera settings for capturing images leading to better restored quality.
To summary, the contributions of this paper include:
• We introduce a novel image attribute, named IRP, as a criterion to measure the potential value of an im-age that can be explored for restoration. By collecting 5500 images as well as their restored quality labels, we investigate several properties of the proposed IRP.
• We analyze the key factors affecting IRP and develop a deep model for IRP prediction. By gradually distilling image distortions that exist in dynamic scenes and se-lective fusing the features to form complement repre-sentations, we verify the superior prediction accuracy of the proposed model.
• We show potential usages of the proposed IRP to var-IRP has ious image restoration related applications. shown its effectiveness in filtering valuable frames for the restoration process, providing auxiliary guidance to restoration models, and also optimizing camera set-tings when capturing images under dynamic scenarios. 2.