Abstract
Images captured with improper exposures usually bring unsatisfactory visual effects. Previous works mainly focus on either underexposure or overexposure correction, result-ing in poor generalization to various exposures. An alterna-tive solution is to mix the multiple exposure data for train-ing a single network. However, the procedures of correcting underexposure and overexposure to normal exposures are much different from each other, leading to large discrep-ancies for the network in correcting multiple-exposures, thus resulting in poor performance. The key point to ad-dress this issue lies in bridging different exposure repre-sentations. To achieve this goal, we design a multiple ex-posure correction framework based on an Exposure Nor-malization and Compensation (ENC) module. Speciﬁcally, the ENC module consists of an exposure normalization part for mapping different exposure features to the exposure-invariant feature space, and a compensation part for in-tegrating the initial features unprocessed by the exposure normalization part to ensure the completeness of informa-tion. Besides, to further alleviate the imbalanced perfor-mance caused by variations in the optimization process, we introduce a parameter regularization ﬁne-tuning strategy to improve the performance of the worst-performed exposure without degrading other exposures. Our model empowered by ENC outperforms the existing methods by more than 2dB and is robust to multiple image enhancement tasks, demon-strating its effectiveness and generalization capability for real-world applications. Code: https://github.com/KevinJ-Huang/ExposureNorm-Compensation. 1.

Introduction
In recent years, camera devices are used to capture pho-tographs of a wide range of scenes at any time. As dif-ferent scenes present various exposure conditions, images captured with underexposures or overexposures often suffer from unsatisfactory visual effects. For this reason, several
*Equal contribution.
†Corresponding author. exposure correction methods have been proposed, includ-ing model-driven-based [4, 9, 11, 21, 38] and deep learning-based approaches [10, 33, 34, 36, 41]. However, most of them focus on either underexposure or overexposed scenes, causing poor generalization to other exposures. This makes them incapable of being deployed in practical applications.
A naive way to solve this problem is to train speciﬁc networks corresponding to each exposure condition, lead-ing to a signiﬁcant increase in training time and parameter space. Alternatively, the network can be trained with a mix-ture of data from various exposure conditions to improve its capability of multiple-exposure correction. However, due to the variations of representations between underexposure and overexposure, the procedures of correcting them to nor-mal exposures differ greatly from each other, as shown in
Fig. 1. This introduces discrepancies for the network in cor-recting lightness and color across multiple-exposures, thus making it difﬁcult to train a single network and resulting in poor performance. Besides, the variations in optimization processes also make the network incline to overlook disad-vantaged data of the mixed datasets [35] and bring about imbalanced performance across exposures.
In this paper, we propose a framework for improving the multiple-exposure correction performances. The key point lies in narrowing the gap of different exposure representa-tions. To this end, we design an Exposure Normalization and Compensation (ENC) module, as shown in Fig. 3. It consists of an exposure normalization part and a compen-sation part. Speciﬁcally, the exposure normalization part maps different exposure features to the exposure-invariant feature space. It is implemented by the Instance Normaliza-tion to coarsely align different exposure features, followed by a normalization distilling loss on the normalized features to further reduce the exposure effect. However, normaliza-tion will inevitably induce the loss of the image discrimina-tive features [17, 27] for image reconstruction. Therefore, the compensation part is introduced for integrating the fea-tures unprocessed by the exposure normalization part in the spatial and channel dimension, which ensures the complete-ness information. Besides, to further enhance the correction effect of the worst-performed exposure caused by imbal-(a) Underexposure correction (b) Overexposure correction
Figure 1. The static illustration of underexposure and overexpo-sure correction curves on samples from SICE dataset, which are signiﬁcantly different from each other. anced performance, an intuitive way for ﬁne-tuning this ex-posure will result in performance degradation for other ex-posures. Here, we ﬁx the parameter of the ENC to keep its normalization ability to all the exposures, and ﬁne-tune the other parts using a parameter regularization strategy. This strategy reduces the update rate of parameters that are im-portant for other exposures, leading to a network with bal-anced improvement for all the exposures.
Moreover, our proposed ENC can be extended to tackle other image degradations, such as image quality degrada-tion captured by different mobile phones, demonstrating the generalization capability of our method.
The main contributions of this work are summarized as:
• We propose a framework for multiple exposure correc-tion by narrowing the gap of different exposure repre-sentations. Particularly, we develop an Exposure Nor-malization and Compensation (ENC) module, which is simple yet effective and can be used as a plug-and-play module for existing exposure correction architectures.
• Inside ENC, we design an exposure normalization part for mapping different exposure features to the exposure-invariant feature space, and a compensation part for integrating the features unprocessed by nor-malization to ensure the completeness of information.
• Aiming to improve the worst-performed exposure dur-ing training, we employ a parameter regularization strategy for ﬁne-tuning it on the network except for the
ENC module, resulting in a balanced improvement.
• We validate the effectiveness of our framework on sev-eral datasets. Furthermore, we extend it to various image-enhancement tasks and achieve remarkable per-formances, which demonstrate its generalization supe-riority for potential usage in real applications. 2.