Abstract
We present an algorithm for detecting planar primitives from unorganized 3D point clouds. Departing from an ini-tial configuration, the algorithm refines both the continu-ous plane parameters and the discrete assignment of in-put points to them by seeking high fidelity, high simplicity and high completeness. Our key contribution relies upon the design of an exploration mechanism guided by a multi-objective energy function. The transitions within the large solution space are handled by five geometric operators that create, remove and modify primitives. We demonstrate the potential of our method on a variety of scenes, from organic shapes to man-made objects, and sensors, from multiview stereo to laser. We show its efficacy with respect to existing primitive fitting approaches and illustrate its applicative in-terest in compact mesh reconstruction, when combined with a plane assembly method. 1.

Introduction
Geometric primitives are popular representations for processing massive 3D data. Such parametric shapes offer a more compact yet meaningful description than raw point clouds or dense meshes [16]. Among the most common types of primitives, planes are particularly important due to their relevance to man-made environments, e.g. urban and indoor scenes. They have been successfully used in many data processing tasks such as data registration [22, 55], ob-ject recognition [40], simultaneous localization and map-ping [15, 17], structure from motion [39, 54], urban model-ing [12, 56] and surface reconstruction [1, 7].
Fitting planar primitives to 3D point clouds is a long-standing problem in computer vision. This is commonly input points are formulated as a clustering operation: grouped into planar components under a user-specified fit-ting tolerance. Solving this problem is, however, not trivial as (i) the number of primitives is unknown, and (ii) some in-put points, called outliers, are associated with no primitive as they do not fall in the fitting tolerance zones of the prim-itives. Finding a good configuration of planar primitives is somehow arbitrary and turns out to be a tradeoff between three objectives: 1. Fidelity: the distance between a primitive and its asso-ciated input points, called inliers, must be small, 2. Simplicity: the number of primitives must be small, 3. Completeness: the ratio of inliers must be high.
Unfortunately, existing methods are not designed to explic-itly control these three objectives simultaneously. They usu-ally perform with one, sometimes two, objectives through either incremental mechanisms [30, 37, 42], multi-labeling energy minimization models [14, 28, 33] or neural networks
[21, 26, 43] that cannot fully explore the large configuration space of this problem.
We propose an algorithm for fitting planar primitives to unorganized point clouds by seeking high fidelity, high sim-plicity and high completeness altogether. Our key contribu-tion relies on the design and efficient implementation of an exploration mechanism that refines an initial configuration by minimizing a multi-objective energy function. The tran-sitions within the large solution space are handled by five geometric operators that create, remove and modify prim-itives and re-assign inliers and outliers. The exploration works in tandem by alternating variational optimization at the global scale and a priority queue that sorts the local operations likely to decrease the energy. Optionally, our method offers the guarantee for not degrading the fidelity, simplicity and completeness of the initial configuration.
We show the potential of our method on different types of scenes, from organic to man-made, as well as on multiple sensors such as laser scanning and multiview stereo (MVS).
We also demonstrate its efficacy with respect to exist-ing approaches and its benefits for reconstructing compact meshes, when combined with a plane assembly method. 2.