Abstract
As lovely as bunnies are, your sketched version would probably not do it justice (Fig. 1). This paper recognises this very problem and studies sketch quality measurement for the first time – letting you find these badly drawn ones.
Our key discovery lies in exploiting the magnitude (L2 norm) of a sketch feature as a quantitative quality metric.
We propose Geometry-Aware Classification Layer (GACL), a generic method that makes feature-magnitude-as-quality-metric possible and importantly does it without the need for specific quality annotations from humans. GACL sees fea-ture magnitude and recognisability learning as a dual task, which can be simultaneously optimised under a neat cross-entropy classification loss. GACL is lightweight with theo-retic guarantees and enjoys a nice geometric interpretation to reason its success. We confirm consistent quality agree-ments between our GACL-induced metric and human per-ception through a carefully designed human study. Notably, we demonstrate three practical sketch applications enabled for the first time using our quantitative quality metric. 1.

Introduction
Everybody can sketch, the debate is on how well. With the proliferation of touchscreen devices, the urge to sketch is ever more pronounced. This is not to mention the broad range of sketch-enabled applications – from recognition
[10,26,46,64], parsing [24,45,63], recreating [8,16,28,50], to leveraging sketch as a query modality for image search
[3, 29, 38, 42, 43] and visual content manipulation [5, 20, 57, 69], or even enabling a drawing agent that excels human at a Pictionary-like sketching game [2].
This paper recognises this very “how well” problem and proposes a learnable metric that for the first time tells us just how badly drawn my bunny (or any other sketch) is – so from the collection of bunny sketches in Fig. 1(a) to an ordered list of bunnies from worse to best in Fig. 1(b). As
*corresponding author
Figure 1. (a) Not every free-hand bunny sketch is of equal quality. (b) We contribute an annotation-free solution (GACL) for discrim-inating quality between bunny (and many other category) sketches.
We show quality discovery under GACL supports reasonable level of quality examination from humans. interesting as the problem sounds in its own right, it also underpins many facets of sketch research at large. These include but not limited to (i) disentangling human factor in model prediction, i.e. whether the model is bad or the sketch is; (ii) facilitating better representation learning, i.e. making data-driven models less prone to overfit by learning against specific quality level; (iii) sketching assistance applications, e.g. helping users to move towards a better bunny.
Quantifying sketch quality is non-trivial. The first ob-stacle is the fatal lack of existing sketch datasets annotated with human quality ratings. This essentially renders most of the recent works on image quality assessment that pre-dicts human opinion scores inapplicable [31,47,52,68]. The sketch-specific trait as a vector representation of sequential coordinates also sets it apart from another line of works on trying to model human-interpretable image quality directly from low-level statistical distortions [1, 21, 58, 66] – com-pared with visual artefacts such as noise, blur and compres-sion, sketch quality is more of a subjective interpretation of holistic visual concepts.
In this paper, we provide the first stab at learning a sketch-specific quality score (metric) without the reliance on human quality annotations. Core to our technical solu-tion is the insight that such a score is inherent to the feature space geometry underlying a recognition task (Fig. 6). We first single out the orderless feature geometry learned off a typical Softmax formulation (Eq. 4) to be the main culprit for the failed quality discovery. This is because Softmax will constantly push sketch features to be close to the class centre and thus undermines any potential geometry forma-tion. The intuition is then that a real-valued feature magni-tude can already induce a quality metric, if the underlying feature geometry can satisfy the following property: the bet-ter quality a sketch, the closer its feature to the class centre.
We revisit Softmax propose a quality-informed alterna-tive named Geometry-Aware Classification Layer (GACL).
GACL implements quality score as feature magnitude (L2 norm) and treats its learning alongside recognition as a dual task. This then importantly gives rise to the geometry con-straints said above, where the monotonic increase of sketch quality score is positively correlated with easy recognisabil-ity, i.e. closer to a class centre. To encourage the integrity of learned feature magnitude, we enforce its optimisation to be convex and that a global optima is guaranteed. We also show that under mild mathematical approximation, sketch quality score under GACL is a de facto margin value to the class decision boundary, yielding a nice semantics to the quality defined (that the better the quality, the farther away a sketch is from its class decision boundary). We de-velop four specific instantiations of GACL and conduct hu-man study respectively to provide some assurance on the or-dering of the quality scores learned. Asking humans to de-vise a strictly-pairwise global ordering is however not feasi-ble [12, 25], especially when sketch quality perception can be highly subjective. For that, we resort to the psychol-ogy literature [11, 15, 51] and adopt a set-based approach where human gets to rank coarsely at set-level other than in-dividual sketches. Results off 12,800 trials (40 participants each doing 320 trials) have human agreeing with the learned quality ordering 92.61% of the time on average across 8 carefully selected sketch categories.
Importantly, we showcase the practical benefits of mod-elling sketch quality in three applications: (i) quality-aware sketch recognition that contributes the new state-of-the-art recognition performance; (ii) quality-guided sketch gen-eration that pushes the envelope of sketch manipulation task beyond generating conceptually correct sketches; (iii) quality-enabled sketch attribution that helps sketch practi-tioners to identify malicious user input. 2.