Abstract
Most existing action quality assessment methods rely on the deep features of an entire video to predict the score, which is less reliable due to the non-transparent inference process and poor interpretability. We argue that under-standing both high-level semantics and internal temporal structures of actions in competitive sports videos is the key to making predictions accurate and interpretable. Towards this goal, we construct a new fine-grained dataset, called
FineDiving, developed on diverse diving events with de-tailed annotations on action procedures. We also propose a procedure-aware approach for action quality assessment, learned by a new Temporal Segmentation Attention module.
Specifically, we propose to parse pairwise query and ex-emplar action instances into consecutive steps with diverse semantic and temporal correspondences. The procedure-aware cross-attention is proposed to learn embeddings be-*Equal contribution. †Corresponding author. tween query and exemplar steps to discover their semantic, spatial, and temporal correspondences, and further serve for fine-grained contrastive regression to derive a reliable scoring mechanism. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach achieves substantial improvements over the state-of-the-art methods with better interpretability. The dataset and code are available at https://github. com/xujinglin/FineDiving. 1.

Introduction
Competitive sports video understanding has become a hot research topic in the computer vision community. As one of the key techniques of understanding sports action,
Action Quality Assessment (AQA) has attracted growing at-tention in recent years. In the 2020 Tokyo Olympic Games, the AI scoring system in gymnastics acted as a judge for as-sessing the athlete’s score performance and providing feed-back for improving the athlete’s competitive skill, which re-duces the controversies in many subjective scoring events,
e.g., diving and gymnastics.
AQA is a task to assess how well an action is performed by estimating a score after analyzing the performance. Un-like conventional action recognition [2, 8, 13, 17, 26, 33, 34, 36, 40–43, 45] and detection [21, 24, 46, 50], AQA is more challenging since an action can be recognized from just one or a few images while the judges need to go through the en-tire action sequence to assess the action performance. Most existing AQA methods [1,5,6,9,18,27–31,39,44,48] regress on the deep features of videos to learn the diverse scores, which is difficult for actions with a small discrepancy hap-pening in similar backgrounds. Since the diving events are usually filmed in a similar environment (i.e., aquatics cen-ters) and all the videos contain the same action routine, that is “take-off”, “flight”, and “entry”, while the subtle dif-ferences mainly appear in the numbers of both somersault and twist, flight positions as well as their executed quali-ties. Capturing these subtle differences requires the AQA method not only to parse the steps of diving action but also to explicitly quantify the executed qualities of these steps.
If we judge the action quality only via regressing a score on the deep features of the whole video, it would be a con-fusing and non-transparent assessment of the action quality, since we cannot explain the final score via analyzing the performances of action steps.
Cognitive science [22, 32] shows that humans learn to assess the action quality by introducing fine-grained anno-tations and reliable comparisons. Inspired by this, we in-troduce these two concepts into AQA, which is challenging since existing AQA datasets lack fine-grained annotations of action procedures and cannot make reliable comparisons.
If we judge the action quality using coarse-grained labels, we cannot date back to a convincing reason from the final action quality score. It is urgent to construct a fine-grained sports video dataset for encouraging a more transparent and reliable scoring approach for AQA.
To address these challenges, we construct a new com-petitive sports video dataset, “FineDiving” (short for Fine-grained Diving), focusing on various diving events, which is the first fine-grained sports video dataset for assessing ac-tion quality. FineDiving has several characteristics (Figure 1, the top half): (1) Two-level semantic structure. All videos are annotated with semantic labels at two levels, namely, action type and sub-action type, where a combination of the presented sub-action types produces an action type. (2)
Two-level temporal structure. The temporal boundaries of actions in each video are annotated, where each action is manually decomposed into consecutive steps according to a well-defined lexicon. (3) Official action scores, judges’ scores, and difficulty degrees are collected from FINA.
We further propose a procedure-aware approach for as-sessing action quality on FineDiving (Figure 1, the bottom half), inspired by the recently proposed CoRe [47]. The proposed framework learns procedure-aware embeddings with a new Temporal Segmentation Attention module (re-ferred to as TSA) to predict accurate scores with better in-terpretability. Specifically, TSA first parses action into con-secutive steps with semantic and temporal correspondences, serving for procedure-aware cross-attention learning. The consecutive steps of query action are served as queries and the steps of exemplar action are served as keys and values.
Then TSA inputs pairwise query and exemplar steps into the transformer and obtains procedure-aware embeddings via cross-attention learning. Finally, TSA performs fine-grained contrastive regression on the procedure-aware em-beddings to quantify step-wise quality differences between query and exemplar, and predict the action score.
The contributions of this work are summarized as: (1)
We construct the first fine-grained sports video dataset for action quality assessment, which contains rich seman-(2) We propose a tics and diverse temporal structures. procedure-aware approach for action quality assessment, which is learned by a new temporal segmentation attention module and quantifies quality differences between query and exemplar in a fine-grained way. (3) Extensive exper-iments illustrate that our procedure-aware approach obtains substantial improvements and achieves the state-of-the-art. 2.