Abstract
Indirect Time-of-Flight (ToF) imaging is widely applied in practice for its superiorities on cost and spatial res-olution. However, lower signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of measurement leads to larger error in ToF imaging, espe-cially for imaging scenes with strong ambient light or long distance.
In this paper, we propose a Fisher-information guided framework to jointly optimize the coding functions (light modulation and sensor demodulation functions) and the reconstruction network of iToF imaging, with the super-vision of the proposed discriminative ﬁsher loss. By intro-ducing the differentiable modeling of physical imaging pro-cess considering various real factors and constraints, e.g., light-falloff with distance, physical implementability of cod-ing functions, etc., followed by a dual-branch depth recon-struction neural network, the proposed method could learn the optimal iToF imaging system in an end-to-end manner.
The effectiveness of the proposed method is extensively ver-iﬁed with both simulations and prototype experiments. 1.

Introduction
Time-of-Flight (ToF) imaging can measure the depth of scenes, and has been widely applied in autonomous driving, face recognition, 3D sensing, augmented/virtual reality, etc.
In terms of working principle, ToF imaging can be divided into direct ToF (dToF) and indirect ToF (iToF). Unlike dToF imaging, which requires high precision pulsed light source and sensors, iToF imaging encodes the depth information in the phase of the continuously modulated light, and thus of much lower cost and higher spatial resolution in practice.
Existing iToF imaging suffers from the low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of measurements [13, 19], especially for the cases with strong ambient light or large distance attenua-tions. Adopting a higher energy light source, increasing the exposure time, or capturing more measurements could help to improve the SNR of detection, while at the expense of increasing the power consumption or the acquisition time.
Recently, Su et al. [31] proposed a ToF reconstruction net-work to improve the robustness to noise by post-processing, without considering the inﬂuence of coding schemes. Gupta
Figure 1. Overview of the proposed ﬁsher information guided learned iToF imaging framework. We propose a differential phys-ical imaging model with learnable coding functions and guided by the proposed discriminative ﬁsher loss, the coding functions and dual-branch depth reconstruction neural network could be op-timized simultaneously and achieve state-of-the-art performance, especially at low SNR scenarios. et al. [8] and Gutierrez-Barragan et al. [9] designed a se-ries of Hamilton coding functions that outperforms the com-monly adopted sinusoid and square coding functions. How-ever, due to the basic assumption of small noise, their per-formance in low SNR scenarios is still limited.
In this paper, we propose an information theory guided framework to jointly optimize the coding functions and the reconstruction neural network of iToF imaging, with the proposed discriminative ﬁsher loss, as shown in Fig. 1.
Speciﬁcally, we formulate the iToF imaging process with a differential physical imaging model with learnable coding functions, taking the physical implementation constraints into consideration. Followed by the imaging model, a dual-branch depth reconstruction neural network is proposed and the proposed method could optimize the entire iToF system in an end-to-end manner. After training the iToF imaging system, we build a prototype iToF imaging system and im-plement the noise tolerant iToF imaging with the optimized coding functions and the reconstruction network. Through
simulation and experimental comparisons with the state-of-the-art methods, we demonstrate the superiority of the pro-posed learned iToF imaging.
In particular, we make the following contributions:
• We propose a Fisher-information guided learning framework to train the coding functions and the recon-struction neural network of the iToF imaging system in an end-to-end manner.
• We model the physical constraints of iToF imaging in the forward module that could learn the physical im-plementable modulation and demodulation functions.
• We constraint the coding functions with the proposed discriminative ﬁsher loss to maximize the information about depth that could be encoded with the coding functions of iToF imaging.
• We build a prototype iToF imaging system with the learned optimal coding functions and verify the state-of-the-art performance of the proposed iToF imaging method, both in simulation and in real captured data. 2.