Abstract
This paper studies the problem of fixing malfunctional 3D objects. While previous works focus on building passive perception models to learn the functionality from static 3D objects, we argue that functionality is reckoned with respect to the physical interactions between the object and the user.
Given a malfunctional object, humans can perform mental simulations to reason about its functionality and figure out how to fix it. Inspired by this, we propose FIXIT, a dataset that contains about 5k poorly-designed 3D physical objects paired with choices to fix them. To mimic humans’ mental simulation process, we present FixNet, a novel framework that seamlessly incorporates perception and physical dy-namics. Specifically, FixNet consists of a perception module to extract the structured representation from the 3D point cloud, a physical dynamics prediction module to simulate the results of interactions on 3D objects, and a functionality prediction module to evaluate the functionality and choose the correct fix. Experimental results show that our frame-work outperforms baseline models by a large margin, and can generalize well to objects with similar interaction types.
Code and dataset are publicly available1. 1.

Introduction
What defines a good 3D object shape? Aspects like aes-thetics, comfort and fun etc play critical roles in shape de-sign. However, these perspectives are all rendered mean-ingless without the utmost consideration of an object for 1http://fixing-malfunctional.csail.mit.edu
everyday use - its functionality. Functionality is a relation between the goal of users’ interaction and the behavior of the object. Each part of the object relates its behavior to the functionality of the entire object shape. For example, the third column in Figure 1 shows the notorious “Coffeepot for Masochists” by the French artist Jacques Carelman [4], in which the rotation of the spout affects the functionality of the coffeepot. There have been recent efforts on learning the functionality of 3D object shapes [33–35, 52, 53]. These works usually treat the functionality as a property of the 3D objects, and use perception systems to predict the property.
This practice is consistent with the early “ecological the-ory of perception” which claims that people could simply pick up clues from the world through direct perception and make predictions about functionality [19]. However, a more widely-accepted notion is that to evaluate functionality, we need to involve physics which are sometimes unperceiv-able [25, 58]. In fact, functionality is reckoned with respect to the physical interactions between the object and the user, instead of being a property associated with the shape only.
For example, in Figure 1, a person has to interact with the
USB to find that the shell fails to protect the chip.
Fixing designs based on functionality is termed as “func-tional reasoning in design” [68]. Specifically, to fix an ob-ject, one has to modify a part and interact with the object to verify whether the fixed object exhibits the desired func-tion [66]. However, in real-life scenarios, it is unrealistic to try out all possible fixes and interact with all the fixed object shapes. Therefore, humans are inclined to perform mental simulation to simulate the effects of interaction [9].
For example, once we have seen how the USB can be in-teracted, we come up with some fixing ideas and mentally simulate the interaction of the fixed USB. Similar mecha-nisms have been achieved for machines via dynamics mod-els [2, 5, 45, 46]. These models are able to simulate future states for a given object and interaction. Equipping ma-chines with the ability to fix objects based on physical dy-namics and functionality benefits many real-world applica-tions. For example, it helps predict the outcome of interac-tions on the objects and recommend fixes to malfunctional objects. When 3D models are designed for virtual reality (VR), it helps guarantee that these 3D models function well.
Inspired by the above ideas, we propose a novel task that requires machines to fix malfunctional objects. To study this problem, we have created a new 3D synthetic dataset,
FIXIT, which contains approximately 5k synthetic point cloud videos of 3D objects. The point cloud videos present the simulations of how the 3D objects are interacted. Most of the interactions are not successful, indicating that the objects do not function well, while a small set of videos demonstrate successful interactions. We pair each video with five choices indicating how to fix the 3D objects. Only one of the five choices is correct.
As a first attempt at this challenging task, we propose
FixNet, a framework that could learn physical dynamics and functional prediction from 3D point cloud videos. Since previous physical dynamics models require full access to particle states and groupings [43], a major challenge to ap-ply them for this new task is how to predict physical dy-namics from raw point cloud videos. Our idea is that the point cloud in 3D objects, after going through perception system that provides structured representations and point correspondences, can be compatible with the particles (i.e., small localized objects to which can be ascribed physical properties) in the physical dynamics system. Specifically,
FixNet is composed of three modules: the perception mod-ule, the physical dynamics prediction module and the func-tionality prediction module. The perception module has two parts: a) a flow prediction network that takes a point cloud video as inputs, and proposes the flows of the points, which are used as pseudo-labels for training the dynam-ics module; and b) a segmentation network that takes the point cloud and the predicted flows, and proposes the parts of the objects, which are used for fixing. The point clouds of the parts are modified according to the fixing choices.
The dynamics prediction module then takes the fixed point clouds, performs physical simulation and outputs an inter-acting video. Finally, the last step of the simulated video is fed into the functionality prediction module to evaluate whether the fixed object functions well.
Experiments on the FIXIT dataset suggest that our
FixNet outperforms several baseline models by a large mar-gin. Moreover, it can generalize well to novel categories with the same interaction type. Model diagnosis and qual-itative examples show that the challenge of FIXIT lies in providing the accurate segmentations for dynamics predic-tion. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel task of fixing 3D object shapes based on functionality that involves 3D perception, physical and functionality reasoning.
• We propose a new dataset, FIXIT, which contains around 5k object shapes across seven categories for fixing.
• We propose a modular framework, FixNet, which in-corporates perception, physical dynamics and functional prediction for fixing.
• Experimental results show that our FixNet outperforms baseline models by a large margin. 2.