Abstract
Multi-object multi-part scene parsing is a challenging task which requires detecting multiple object classes in a scene and segmenting the semantic parts within each ob-ject. In this paper, we propose FLOAT, a factorized label space framework for scalable multi-object multi-part pars-ing. Our framework involves independent dense predic-tion of object category and part attributes which increases scalability and reduces task complexity compared to the monolithic label space counterpart.
In addition, we pro-pose an inference-time ‘zoom’ refinement technique which significantly improves segmentation quality, especially for smaller objects/parts. Compared to state of the art, FLOAT obtains an absolute improvement of 2.0% for mean IOU (mIOU) and 4.8% for segmentation quality IOU (sqIOU) on the Pascal-Part-58 dataset. For the larger Pascal-Part-108 dataset, the improvements are 2.1% for mIOU and 3.9% for sqIOU. We incorporate previously excluded part attributes and other minor parts of the Pascal-Part dataset to cre-ate the most comprehensive and challenging version which we dub Pascal-Part-201. FLOAT obtains improvements of 8.6% for mIOU and 7.5% for sqIOU on the new dataset, demonstrating its parsing effectiveness across a challeng-ing diversity of objects and parts. The code and datasets are available at floatseg.github.io. 1.

Introduction
Semantic scene parsing is a foundational image under-standing problem in the vision community [23,49,50,52,54, 55,60]. Typically, the goal is to segment objects and “stuff” regions (e.g. road, background) in the scene. Multi-object multi-part parsing is a significantly more challenging vari-ant which requires part-level segmentation of each scene object [32, 40, 58]. Compared to traditional object-level segmentation, semantic representations infused with fine-grained part-level knowledge can provide richer informa-tion for downstream reasoning tasks including visual ques-tion answering [19], perceptual concept learning [5], shape modelling [1, 12] and many others [2, 8, 10, 21, 39, 53].
For part-based object segmentation, some existing ap-proaches tackle the simpler problem of single-object part parsing [14–16, 41, 42]. Although a few recent approaches have addressed multi-object multi-part parsing [32, 40, 58], they consider part labels to be independent and do not take advantage of intra/inter ontological relationships among objects and parts at label level. They also tend to per-form poorly on smaller and infrequent parts/categories. To address these shortcomings, we propose FLOAT, a novel factorized label space framework for scalable multi-object multi-part parsing. Our approach is motivated by the fol-lowing observations:
Observation #1: Object part names in datasets typically consist of a root component and side component(s). Many object categories contain parts with the same root com-ponent. For example, the root component of ‘left front leg’ found in horse, cow etc. and ‘right leg’ found in person, is leg. Therefore, parts can be grouped based on their root component.
The example also suggests that object categories whose instances contain shared category-level attributes (e.g. “liv-ing things that move”) are likely to contain same root com-ponents (such as leg). Using this criterion, some object cat-egories (e.g. cow, person, bird) can be grouped as
‘animate’. Similarly, some categories (e.g. “rigid bodied”) can be grouped as ‘inanimate’. As with the ‘animate’ group,
‘inanimate’ group categories also share many root part com-ponents (e.g. ‘wheel’ in aeroplane, bicycle, car).
Observation #2: Similar to Observation #1, parts can also be grouped by side component – e.g. ‘front’ is a side com-ponent of ‘front wheel’ found in bike and ‘left front leg’ in person.
Factoring the object/part label space in terms of these groups (‘animate’, ‘inanimate’, ‘side’) greatly reduces the
In turn, this increases effective number of output labels. scalability in terms of object categories and part cardinality.
The design choice (‘factoring’) also enables efficient data sharing when learning semantic representations for grouped parts and improves performance for infrequent classes (see
Fig. 1).
A second key feature of our framework is IZR, an inference-time segmentation refinement technique.
IZR transforms ‘zoomed in’ versions of preliminary per-object label maps into refined counterparts which are finally com-posited back onto the segmentation canvas. Apart from the advantage of not requiring additional training, IZR is em-pirically superior to alternate inference-time schemes and significantly improves segmentation quality, especially for smaller objects/parts.
In existing works, results are reported on simplified, label-merged versions of the original dataset (Pascal-Part [8]). In our work, we incorporate previously excluded part attributes and other minor parts to create Pascal-Part-201, the most comprehensive and challenging version of
Pascal-Part [8]. Along with the standard mean IOU (mIOU) and mAvg scores, we report sqIOU [20] and sqAvg – nor-malized segmentation quality measures which are less af-fected by spatial scale of objects and parts.
In summary, our contributions are the following:
• FLOAT, a novel factorized label space framework for scalable multi-object multi-part parsing (Sec. 3).
• IZR, an inference-time refinement technique which significantly improves segmentation quality especially for smaller objects/parts in the scene (Sec. 3.4).
• Pascal-Part-201, the most comprehensive and chal-lenging version of the Pascal-Part [8] dataset (Sec. 4).
Experimental evaluation demonstrates FLOAT’s supe-rior performance on Pascal-Part-201 relative to exist-ing approaches (Sec. 5). 2.