Abstract
Instance segmentation is a fundamental vision task that aims to recognize and segment each object in an image. it requires costly annotations such as bound-However, ing boxes and segmentation masks for learning.
In this work, we propose a fully unsupervised learning method that learns class-agnostic instance segmentation without any annotations. We present FreeSOLO, a self-supervised instance segmentation framework built on top of the sim-ple instance segmentation method SOLO. Our method also presents a novel localization-aware pre-training frame-work, where objects can be discovered from complicated scenes in an unsupervised manner. FreeSOLO achieves 9.8% AP50 on the challenging COCO dataset, which even outperforms several segmentation proposal methods time, we that use manual annotations. demonstrate unsupervised class-agnostic instance segmen-tation successfully. FreeSOLO’s box localization signifi-cantly outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised object de-tection/discovery methods, with about 100% relative im-For the first
*Part of this work was done when XW was an intern at NVIDIA, and
CS was with The Univerity of Adelaide. CS is the corresponding author. provements in COCO AP. FreeSOLO further demonstrates superiority as a strong pre-training method, outperform-ing state-of-the-art self-supervised pre-training methods by
+9.8% AP when fine-tuning instance segmentation with only 5% COCO masks.
Code is available at: github.com/NVlabs/FreeSOLO 1.

Introduction
Instance segmentation is a fundamental computer vision task that requires recognizing the objects in an image and segmenting each of them at the pixel level. Instance seg-mentation subsumes object detection, as bounding box can be thought of as a coarse parametric representation of a seg-mentation mask. Therefore, it is a more demanding and challenging task than object detection by requiring both instance-level and pixel-level predictions. Recently, sig-nificant progress [1–7] has been made to address the in-stance segmentation task. However, the dense prediction nature of the task requires rich and expensive annotations during training. Weakly-supervised instance segmentation methods are thus proposed to relax the annotation require-ments [8–13]. Latest methods such as BoxInst [11] and Dis-coBox [13] have significantly closed the gap to fully super-vised methods. However, their competitive result still relies on box or point annotations that contain strong localization information.
In this work, we explore learning class-agnostic instance segmentation without any annotations. The work here is built upon our recent work of SOLO [7], a simple yet strong instance segmentation framework, and the self-supervised dense feature learning method of DenseCL [14]. SOLO adopts a one-stage design, which contains a category branch and a mask branch to encode the object category informa-tion and segmentation proposals, respectively. Our main intuition is that this “top-down meets bottom-up” design al-lows us to unify pixel grouping, object localization and fea-ture pre-training in a fully self-supervised manner.
Our proposed framework, FreeSOLO, contains two major pillars: Free Mask and Self-supervised SOLO, as shown in Figure 2. Specifically, Free Mask contains self-supervised design elements that promote objectness in net-work attention.
It contains a “query-key” attention de-sign, where the queries and keys are constructed from self-supervised features. The method takes the cosine similarity between each query with all the keys, thus obtaining a set of query-conditioned (seeded) attention maps as coarse masks.
The coarse masks are ranked and filtered by their mask-ness scores, followed by non-maximum suppression (NMS) to further remove the redundant masks. Self-Supervised
SOLO then takes the coarse masks as pseudo-labels to train a SOLO model. Since the coarse masks can be inaccu-rate, Self-Supervised SOLO contains a weakly-supervised design to better accommodate the label noise. This is fol-lowed by a self-training strategy to further refine mask qual-ity and to improve accuracy. Our network design is almost the same as SOLO with minimal modifications, thus leading to simple and fast inference process.
FreeSOLO provides an effective solution to the challeng-ing problem of self-supervised instance segmentation. With the bounding boxes obtained from the predicted masks,
FreeSOLO also shows significant advantage as an unsuper-vised object discovery method.
In addition to the above roles, we further consider FreeSOLO as a strong self-supervised pretext task for instance segmentation by jointly learning object-level and pixel-level representations. Com-pared to pre-training for image classification [15–17], ob-ject detection [18, 19] and semantic segmentation [20, 21], pre-training for instance segmentation is still under-studied.
General instance segmentation requires not only localizing objects at the pixel level, but also recognizing their seman-tic categories. Interestingly, the design of FreeSOLO allows us to directly learn object-level semantic representations in an unsupervised manner. Upon completing the pre-training, all the learned parameters except for the last classification layer can be used to initialize the supervised instance seg-mentation models to improve accuracy.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows.
• We propose the Free Mask approach, which leverages the specific design of SOLO to effectively extract coarse ob-ject masks and semantic embeddings in an unsupervised manner.
• We further propose Self-Supervised SOLO, which takes the coarse masks and semantic embeddings from Free
Mask and trains the SOLO instance segmentation model, with several novel design elements to overcome label noise in the coarse masks.
• With the above methods, FreeSOLO presents a simple and effective framework that demonstrates unsupervised instance segmentation successfully for the first time. No-tably, it outperforms some proposal generation methods that use manual annotations. FreeSOLO also outperforms state-of-the-art methods for unsupervised object detec-tion/discovery by a significant margin (relative +100% in
COCO AP).
• In addition, FreeSOLO serves as a strong self-supervised pretext task for representation learning for instance seg-mentation. For example, when fine-tuning on COCO dataset with 5% labeled masks, FreeSOLO outperforms
DenseCL [14] by +9.8% AP. 2.