Abstract
Normal Frame
Anomalous Frame
A Anomalous Video
Unlabeled Video
...
...
...
...
Video anomaly detection is well investigated in weakly-supervised and one-class classiﬁcation (OCC) settings.
However, unsupervised video anomaly detection methods are quite sparse, likely because anomalies are less frequent in occurrence and usually not well-deﬁned, which when coupled with the absence of ground truth supervision, could adversely affect the performance of the learning algorithms.
This problem is challenging yet rewarding as it can com-pletely eradicate the costs of obtaining laborious annota-tions and enable such systems to be deployed without hu-man intervention. To this end, we propose a novel unsuper-vised Generative Cooperative Learning (GCL) approach for video anomaly detection that exploits the low frequency of anomalies towards building a cross-supervision between a generator and a discriminator. In essence, both networks get trained in a cooperative fashion, thereby allowing unsu-pervised learning. We conduct extensive experiments on two large-scale video anomaly detection datasets, UCF crime and ShanghaiTech. Consistent improvement over the exist-ing state-of-the-art unsupervised and OCC methods corrob-orate the effectiveness of our approach. 1.

Introduction
In the real world, learning-based anomaly detection tasks are extremely challenging mainly because of the rare oc-currence of such events. The challenge further exacerbates owing to the unconstrained nature of these events. Obtain-ing sufﬁcient anomaly examples is thus quite cumbersome, while one may safely assume that an exhaustive set, par-ticularly required for training fully-supervised models, will never be collected. To make learning tractable, anomalies have often been attributed as signiﬁcant deviations from the normal data. Therefore, a popular approach towards anomaly detection is to train a one-class classiﬁer which learns the dominant data representations using only normal training examples [14,17,25,28,41,42,45,47,60,64,66,72]
*Corresponding Author. ∗∗Part of this work was done while Zaigham was a visiting researcher at ETH Zurich and an intern at MBZUAI. (a) Fully Supervised (b) One-class (c) Weakly-supervised (d) Unsupervised
A
Figure 1. Different training modes for video anomaly detection: (a) Fully supervised mode requires frame-level normal/abnormal annotations in the training data. (b) One-Class Classiﬁcation (OCC) requires only normal training data. (c) Weakly supervised mode requires video-level normal/abnormal annotations. (d) Un-supervised mode requires no training data annotations. (Fig. 1). A noticeable drawback of one-class classiﬁca-tion (OCC) methods is the limited availability of the nor-mal training data, not capturing all normalcy variations [9].
In addition, the OCC approaches are usually unsuitable for complex problems with diverse multiple classes and a wide range of dynamic situations often found in video surveil-lance. In such cases, an unseen normal activity may deviate signiﬁcantly from the learned normal representations to be predicted as anomalous, resulting in false alarms [14, 67].
Recently, weakly supervised anomaly detection methods have gained signiﬁcant popularity [24,26,34,46,56,63] that reduce the cost of obtaining manual ﬁne-grained annota-tions by employing video-level labels [50, 65, 67, 69, 74].
Speciﬁcally, a video is labeled as anomalous if some of its contents are anomalous and normal if all of its contents are normal, requiring manual inspection of the full videos. Al-though such annotations are relatively cost-effective, yet re-main impractical in many real-world applications. There is a plethora of video data, speciﬁcally raw footage, that can be leveraged for anomaly detection training if no annotation cost is incurred. Unfortunately, to the best of our knowl-edge, there are hardly any notable attempts in leveraging the unlabelled training data for video anomaly detection.
In this work, we explore unsupervised mode for video anomaly detection that is certainly more challenging than fully, weakly or one-class supervision (Fig. 1). However, it is also more rewarding due to minimal assumptions and hence will encourage the development of novel and more practical algorithms. Note that, the term ‘unsupervised’ in literature often refers to OCC approaches which assume all normal training data [11, 37, 64, 66]. However, it ren-ders the overall learning problem partially supervised [19].
In approaching unsupervised anomaly detection in videos, we exploit the simple facts that videos are information-rich compared to still images and anomalies are less frequent than the normal happenings [8, 29, 51, 67], and attempt to leverage such domain knowledge in a structured manner.
To this end, we propose a Generative Cooperative
Learning (GCL) method which takes unlabelled videos as input and learns to predict frame-level anomaly score pre-dictions as output. The proposed GCL comprises two key components, a generator and a discriminator, which get trained in a mutually cooperative manner towards improv-ing the anomaly detection performance. The generator not only reconstructs the abundantly available normal rep-resentations but also distorts the possible high-conﬁdence anomalous representations by using a novel negative learn-ing (NL) approach. The discriminator instead estimates the probability of an instance to be anomalous. For unsuper-vised anomaly detection, we create pseudo-labels from the generator and use these to train the discriminator. In the fol-lowing step, we create pseudo-labels from the trained ver-sion of discriminator and then use these to improve the gen-erator. The overall system is trained in an alternate fashion where, in each iteration, both the generator and the discrim-inator get improved with mutual cooperation.
Contributions. We propose an anomaly detection approach capable of localizing anomalous events in complex surveil-lance scenarios without requiring labelled training data. To the best of our knowledge, our method is the ﬁrst rigorous attempt tackling the surveillance videos anomaly detection in a fully unsupervised mode. A novel Generative Coopera-tive Learning (GCL) framework is proposed that comprises a generator, a discriminator, and cross-supervision. The generator network is forced not to reconstruct anomalies by using a novel negative learning approach. Extensive exper-iments on two large-scale complex anomalous event detec-tion datasets, UCF-Crime and ShanghaiTech, show that our method provides visible gains over the baselines and several existing unsupervised as well as OCC methods. 2.