Abstract
We address the problem of generalizability for multi-view 3D human pose estimation. The standard approach is to first detect 2D keypoints in images and then apply triangula-tion from multiple views. Even though the existing methods achieve remarkably accurate 3D pose estimation on pub-lic benchmarks, most of them are limited to a single spa-tial camera arrangement and their number. Several meth-ods address this limitation but demonstrate significantly de-graded performance on novel views. We propose a stochas-tic framework for human pose triangulation and demon-strate a superior generalization across different camera ar-rangements on two public datasets. In addition, we apply the same approach to the fundamental matrix estimation problem, showing that the proposed method can success-fully apply to other computer vision problems. The stochas-tic framework achieves more than 8.8% improvement on the 3D pose estimation task, compared to the state-of-the-art, and more than 30% improvement for fundamental matrix estimation, compared to a standard algorithm. 1.

Introduction
Human pose estimation is a vision task of detecting the key-points that represent a standard set of human joints. The area is extremely competitive, especially due to the ad-vances in deep learning. Pose estimation is particularly im-portant for applications such as medicine, fashion industry, anthropometry, and entertainment [1]. In this work, we fo-cus on 3D human pose estimation from multiple views in a single time frame.
The common approach to multi-view pose estimation is to (1) detect correspondent 2D keypoints in each view using pretrained pose detector [37, 8, 35], and then (2) triangulate
[15, 25, 13, 26, 18, 32]. A naive approach takes 2D de-tections as they are and applies triangulation from all avail-able views. Due to the variety of poses and self-occlusions, some views contain erroneous detections, which should be ignored or their influence mitigated in the triangulation pro-cess. One way to ignore the erroneous detections is to apply
Figure 1: We propose a stochastic framework for human pose triangulation from multiple views and demonstrate its successful generalization across different camera arrange-ments, their number, and different public datasets. The up-per two and the lower left image shows different camera arrangements and their number on CMU Panoptic Studio dataset [17]. The lower right part shows the Human3.6M’s 4-camera arrangement [14].
RANSAC [10], marking the keypoints whose reprojection errors are above a threshold as outliers [30, 13]. The prob-lem with vanilla RANSAC is that it is non-differentiable, so the gradients are not back-propagated, which disables end-to-end learning. Most of the state-of-the-art 3D pose estimation approaches extract 2D image features, such as heatmaps, from multiple views, and combine them for 3D elevation in an end-to-end fashion [15, 26, 25]; we re-fer to those approaches as the learnable triangulation ap-proaches.
Due to a mostly-fixed set of cameras during training, the learnable triangulation approaches are often limited to a single camera arrangement and their number. Sev-eral works attempt to generalize outside the training data
[26, 15, 18, 13, 31, 29, 34], but the demonstrated perfor-mance on novel views is significantly lower than using the original (base) views.
Inspired by stochastic learning [27] and its applications in computer vision [4, 5, 6], we propose generalizable tri-angulation of human pose. First, we generate a pool of random hypotheses. A hypothesis is a 3D pose where the points are obtained by triangulating a random subset of views for each joint separately. Each generated hypothesis pass through a scoring neural network. The loss function is an expectation of the triangulation error, i.e. E(hi) = (cid:80) i eisi, where ei is the error of the hypothesis hi and si is the hypothesis score. By minimizing the error expecta-tion, the model learns the distribution of hypotheses. The key idea is to learn to evaluate 3D pose hypotheses without considering the spatial camera arrangement used for trian-gulation.
The proposed approach has several practical advantages over the previous methods. First, we demonstrate its con-sistent generalization performance across different camera arrangement on two public datasets - Human3.6M [14] and
Panoptic Studio [17] (see Fig. 1). Second, we show that the proposed model learns human pose prior and define a novel metric for pose prior evaluation. Finally, we apply the same stochastic approach to the problem of fundamen-tal matrix estimation from noisy 2D detections and compare it to the standard 8-point algorithm, showing that the pro-posed framework successfully applies to computer vision problems other than human pose triangulation. 2.