Abstract implicit
Recent development of neural function has shown tremendous success on high-quality 3D shape re-construction. However, most works divide the space into inside and outside of the shape, which limits their repre-senting power to single-layer and watertight shapes. This limitation leads to tedious data processing (converting non-watertight raw data to watertight) as well as the inca-pability of representing general object shapes in the real
In this work, we propose a novel method to rep-world. resent general shapes including non-watertight shapes and shapes with multi-layer surfaces. We introduce General Im-plicit Function for 3D Shape (GIFS), which models the re-lationships between every two points instead of the relation-ships between points and surfaces. Instead of dividing 3D space into predefined inside-outside regions, GIFS encodes whether two points are separated by any surface. Experi-ments on ShapeNet show that GIFS outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods in terms of reconstruction qual-ity, rendering efficiency, and visual fidelity. Project page is available at https://jianglongye.com/gifs. 1.

Introduction 3D shape reconstruction is a fundamental problem in computer vision, robotics, and graphics. The choice of shape representation heavily affects the reconstruction qual-ity. In recent years, Neural Implicit Function (NIFs) have achieved high quality and high resolution reconstruction with a compact representation [9, 11, 31, 47, 48]. Most NIF approaches employ a neural network to classify whether a 3D point is inside or outside the surface [47] as shown in
Figure 1(a) or compute the signed distance from a 3D point to one surface [48]. However, most shapes in the real world cannot be simply represented by one watertight surface.
Considering multi-layer shapes (e.g., cars with seats in-side), binary classification of the 3D space is insufficient.
To tackle this problem, one possible approach is to extend the original definition from binary classification to multi-class classification. We take the double-layer circle as an example and illustrate this idea in Figure 1(b). The lim-Figure 1. Comparison of different methods. Previous works divide the space into inside and outside like (a). One possible approach for multi-layer shape is to perform multi-class classifi-cation like (b). Our method no longer assigns predefined labels to points but classifies whether whether two points are separated by any surface, as shown in (c). In (d) and (e), we present a demo shape and a reconstructed bus from ShapeNet respectively. itation of the extension is that shapes with different layers require different models. Therefore it can not represent gen-eral shapes in a unified approach. This method will also fail to represent non-watertight shapes (e.g., garments) since they cannot be partitioned into any number of regions.
In this paper, we introduce a General Implicit Function for 3D Shape (GIFS). Along with this representation, we further design an algorithm to extract explicit surfaces from
GIFS. Instead of dividing a 3D space into predefined cate-gories like Figure 1(a) and (b), our representation focuses on the relationships between every two 3D points. Specifi-cally, we define a binary flag to indicate whether two points are on the same side of object surfaces (see Sec. 3.1 for formal definition). As shown in Figure 1(c), three points are separated by different object surfaces, and our method no longer assigns predefined labels to points but compares between them. We embed 3D points into latent space and employ neural networks to approximate binary flags based on their embeddings. In this way, our method is still able to separate different regions, and the shape is implicitly repre-sented by the decision boundary of the binary flags.
Compared to all previous NIFs that model the relation-ship between points and surfaces (occupancy [47], signed distance [48] and unsigned distance [13]), modeling the re-lationships between different points with GIFS allows rep-resenting general shapes including multi-layer and non-watertight shapes. To recover the shape from GIFS, we modify the Marching Cubes algorithm to build triangle faces from sampled binary flags. We show a demo shape represented by our method in Figure 1(d), it is a double-layered ball on top of a non-watertight plane. The larger ball (outside surface) is cut for better visualization.
Experiments on ShapeNet [10] demonstrate that GIFS achieves state-of-the-art performance, and can be trained directly on the raw data. Directly trainable on raw data not only avoids tedious data processing but also prevents the loss of accuracy during pre-processing. Compared with
NDF [13], another generalized shape representation outputs point cloud, our GIFS is far more efficient and visually ap-pealing due to the straightforward mesh generation. We show an example of the reconstruction results on ShapeNet in Figure 1 (e), which is a bus with multiple seats inside.
We highlight our main contributions as follows:
• We introduce a novel generalized shape representation based on spatial relationship between points.
• We design a learning-based implementation GIFS and a surface extraction algorithm for it.
• Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance in 3D reconstruction for watertight and more general shapes and shows advantages in rendering efficiency and visual fidelity over existing approaches. 2.