Abstract
Recently, deep network-based image compressed sens-ing methods achieved high reconstruction quality and re-duced computational overhead compared with traditional methods. However, existing methods obtain measurements only from partial features in the network and use it only once for image reconstruction. They ignore there are low, mid, and high-level features in the network [38] and all of them are essential for high-quality reconstruction. More-over, using measurements only once may not be enough for extracting richer information from measurements. To ad-dress these issues, we propose a novel Measurements Reuse
Convolutional Compressed Sensing Network (MR-CCSNet) which employs Global Sensing Module (GSM) to collect all level features for achieving an efﬁcient sensing and Mea-surements Reuse Block (MRB) to reuse measurements mul-tiple times on multi-scale. Finally, we conduct a series of experiments on three benchmark datasets to show that our model can signiﬁcantly outperform state-of-the-art meth-ods. Code is available at: https://github.com/ fze0012/MR-CCSNet. 1.

Introduction
Compressed Sensing [11](CS), a signal processing tech-nique for efﬁciently acquiring and reconstructing a signal, has developed rapidly and attracted the attention of many researchers. Given a high-dimensional signal x ∈ RN , the measurements of x, denoted by y ∈ RM , is formulated as y = Φx, where Φ ∈ RM ×N is sensing matrix and M
N is sampling ratio. Because M (cid:3) N , recovering x is generally impossible for the ill-posed problem. CS shows that the signal x can be reconstructed from y with high probability when the signal x is sparse in some domain [6, 12].
In the study of image CS, the two core problems are (1) the design of sensing matrix and (2) recovering the origi-nal signal x from its linear measurements y. For the former one, many matrices [1, 10, 15, 16, 25] are proposed, but they
*Corresponding author. are hand-designed and ignore there are statistical correlation between different elements of signal. For the latter one, the papers of [7, 23, 30, 41, 42] propose methods for exploring image priors and combining optimization criteria and iter-ative thresholding algorithms [17]. These methods require high computational overhead and perform poorly when the sampling ratio is extremely low.
In recent years, deep learning has been widely used in computer vision and shows superior performance [21, 24].
Researchers were inspired to solve these two challenges of
CS with deep learning, called Deep Compressed Sensing (DCS). A few DCS methods [27, 28, 32, 34, 40] have been proposed and achieve promising results since the powerful learning and representation capabilities of neural networks.
Despite their success, existing DCS methods only use a convolutional layer to learn the sensing matrix, which ig-nores the spatial features in the image.
In addition, be-cause the residual architecture is widely used in reconstruc-tion network, the reconstruction quality relies on it. To ad-dress these issues, Zheng et al. proposed RK-CCSNet [43].
For the former one, RK-CCSNet use the Sequential Con-volutional Module (SCM) to gradually compact the image size through a sequence of ﬁlters. For the latter one, RK-CCSNet proposed the second-order residual architecture ac-cording to the relationship between ResNet [18] and Ordi-nary Differential Equation.
Although RK-CCSNet proposed an effective strategy for image CS, it always suffers from these problems: (1) There are hierarchical nature of the features in the convolutional neural networks (CNNs): the low, mid, and high layer learn features such as edges, complex textures, and objects, re-spectively. But RK-CCSNet only samples from the high-est layer, which ignores a large amount of rich features contained in those neglected layers; (2) Existing methods
[27, 32, 40, 43] recover the original image from measure-ments using deep learning, which takes measurements as input and use it only once. It extracts features from mea-surements in a rather shallow manner.
To address these issues, we propose Global Sensing
Module (GSM) and Measurements Reuse Block (MRB). In
GSM, as shown in Fig. 1, we ﬁrst use a convolutional layer
Input
Input
Input pool, /8 pool, /4 pool, /2 32×32 conv 3×3 conv 3×3 conv 3×3 conv 1×1 conv (a) CSNet+ (b) RK-CCSNet (c) MR-CCSNet
Figure 1. This ﬁgure shows the sensing network of CSNet+ [32], (a): There is only
RK-CCSNet [43], and our proposed model. a convolutional layer, so the spatial features in the image are ig-nored. (b): Although there are multiple convolutional layers, it only samples from the highest layer. Therefore, there are the high-est level features in the measurements and low and mid-level fea-tures are ignored. (c) Overview of GSM. To take advantage of the hierarchical nature of the CNNs, which are neglected in RK-CCSNet, we use a shortcut connection pass the features of dif-ferent layer to the end. And then, 1 × 1 convolutions are used to sample. Because we sample from all level features, there are richer features in measurements than CSNet+ and RK-CCSNet. to get a high dimensional feature. After that, we gradually compact the feature maps by multiple convolutional layers.
And then we collect all level features in the network. Fi-nally, we obtain measurements by 1 × 1 convolutions. In order to match dimensions, we add pooling layer into the shortcut connection. In MRB, we ﬁrst compact the phased reconstructed result and get multiple feature maps. After that, we extract matching information from measurements.
Finally, we fuse them on multi-scale. It is a promising man-ner to move from shallow measurements utilizing to deep.
We conduct experiments on three benchmark data sets:
BSDS500 [2], Set5 [4], and Set14 [39] and chose PSNR and
SSIM [19] as the evaluation metrics. Evaluation results in-dicate that MR-CCSNet can signiﬁcantly outperform state-of-the-art methods. In particular, we show that our model can achieve high reconstruction quality at low sampling ra-tio. In addition, we show that GSM and MRB are effective by ablation studies.
To conclude, our contributions are three-fold: (1) pro-posal of the GSM which can achieve efﬁcient sampling; (2) proposal of the MRB for making full use of measurements; (3) building an end-to-end network MR-CCSNet for image
CS based on GSM and MRB, and demonstrating its effec-tiveness on three benchmark data sets. 2.