Abstract
The crux of long-term tracking lies in the difficulty of tracking the target with discontinuous moving caused by out-of-view or occlusion. Existing long-term tracking meth-ods follow two typical strategies. The first strategy employs a local tracker to perform smooth tracking and uses another re-detector to detect the target when the target is lost. While it can exploit the temporal context like historical appear-ances and locations of the target, a potential limitation of such strategy is that the local tracker tends to misidentify a nearby distractor as the target instead of activating the re-detector when the real target is out of view. The other long-term tracking strategy tracks the target in the entire image globally instead of local tracking based on the pre-vious tracking results. Unfortunately, such global tracking strategy cannot leverage the temporal context effectively. In this work, we combine the advantages of both strategies: tracking the target in a global view while exploiting the tem-poral context. Specifically, we perform global tracking via ensemble of local trackers spreading the full image. The smooth moving of the target can be handled steadily by one local tracker. When the local tracker accidentally loses the target due to suddenly discontinuous moving, another local tracker close to the target is then activated and can read-ily take over the tracking to locate the target. While the activated local tracker performs tracking locally by lever-aging the temporal context, the ensemble of local trackers renders our model the global view for tracking. Extensive experiments on six datasets demonstrate that our method performs favorably against state-of-the-art algorithms. 1.

Introduction
The long-term visual tracking task has attracted more at-tention from the visual tracking community in recent years.
Compared with short-term tracking, the long-term tracking task is much closer to the real-world application, due to the following two differences. First, the average duration of the sequences in the long-term tracking benchmarks (such as LaSOT [13], TLP [29], and OxUvA [33]) is hundreds of
∗Equal contribution.
†Corresponding authors: Wenjie Pei and
Zhenyu He (wenjiecoder@outlook.com and zhenyuhe@hit.edu.cn).
Figure 1. Illustration of the tracking process via ensemble of local trackers for tracking a wingsuit flyer, which disappears from the left-bottom corner of the view and then reappears from the right-bottom corner. The color of sample positions denotes the attention weight. At first, the Local Tracker (LT) at the left-bottom corner is activated and moves following the target to keep tracking it until the target disappears. While the activated local tracker loses the target, it moves back to where it starts moving, as shown in the 697th frame. When the target reappears, the local tracker at the right-bottom corner is activated and keeps tracking the target. The ensemble of local trackers collaborates to achieve global tracking. seconds, which is much longer than that (tens of seconds) of the short-term tracking benchmarks (OTB2015 [37], Track-ingNet [30], and GOT-10k [18], to name a few). Second, the long-term tracking task requires the algorithms to be able to cope with the discontinuous moving of the target caused by the disappearance and reappearance of the target.
Most existing trackers [1,2,8,22,46] search for the target within a local image region, named local trackers, and thus cannot handle the frequently discontinuous moving of the target in the long-term tracking task. To handle this issue, a typical strategy [5, 19, 26, 41] is to equip the local tracker with a global re-detector to detect the target after the local tracker fails. Such a strategy performs switching between local tracking and global detection according to the previ-ous tracking result, named local-global switching strategy.
A merit of this strategy is that the temporal context includ-ing historical appearances and locations of the target can be exploited for local tracking. However, whether to switch to global detection is totally decided by the local tracking re-sult. It increases the risk that the algorithm misidentifies a
distractor as the target instead of activating the re-detector when the real target is out of the view of the local tracker.
In contrast to the local-global switching strategy, another type of long-term trackers [17, 44] adopt a global track-ing strategy which performs global re-detection to locate the target in the entire image on every frame. For exam-ple, GlobalTrack [17] performs global tracking by one-shot detection, totally ignoring the temporal context such as his-torical appearances and locations of the target. As a result,
GlobalTrack is vulnerable to the appearance variations of the target and the background distractors. To alleviate the issue, DMTrack [44] introduces a Re-ID embedding into the global re-detection framework to associate the detections across adjacent frames to utilize the previous re-detection results. However, this Re-ID embedding is learned using only pedestrian datasets [11, 28, 38, 45], limiting the gener-alization ability for tracking an arbitrary target object.
In this paper, we propose to perform global tracking via ensemble of local trackers, which combines the merits of both above strategies: tracking the target in a global view while exploiting the temporal context. Specifically, our al-gorithm deploys an ensemble of local trackers on different reference positions over the entire image, and every local tracker searches for the target within a local region around the reference position. With reasonable reference positions and search range, the search regions of all local trackers can cover the entire image, and then these local trackers collab-orate to achieve global tracking.
The collaboration mechanisms in our design are: 1)
When a local tracker successfully locates the target (called activated), it will move following the target to attempt to keep tracking it in the subsequent frames. Generally, the target moving smoothly can be tracked by a local tracker consecutively. 2) When the activated local tracker acciden-tally loses the target due to suddenly discontinuous mov-ing, another local tracker close to the target can readily take over the tracking to locate the target, i.e., being activated, to avoid tracking failure. The local tracker that loses the target will move back to where it starts moving. During the period when a local tracker steadily tracks the target, our algorithm exploits the temporal context to improve the local tracking robustness, which further extends the duration that this local tracker successfully tracks the target.
Specifically, we design a deformable attention-based lo-cal tracker to search for the target within a dynamic local region. Thus we can simulate the routine local tracking mechanism in the global view by moving the dynamic lo-cal search region following the target. Based on the local tracker, we propose a temporal context transferring scheme to exploit the historical appearances and locations of the tar-get for local tracking. Figure 1 illustrates the tracking pro-cess via ensemble of local trackers. To conclude, we make the following contributions:
• We propose a global tracking algorithm via ensemble of local trackers, which can track the target in a global view while exploiting the temporal context.
• We design a deformable attention-based local tracker to simulate the local tracking mechanism in the global view and a temporal context transferring scheme based on the local tracker to exploit the temporal context.
• We achieve favorable performance against state-of-the-art methods on six diverse datasets, demonstrating the effectiveness of our algorithm. 2.