Abstract
Measurements from the Event Horizon Telescope en-abled the visualization of light emission around a black hole for the first time. So far, these measurements have been used to recover a 2D image under the assumption that the
In emission field is static over the period of acquisition. this work, we propose BH-NeRF, a novel tomography ap-proach that leverages gravitational lensing to recover the continuous 3D emission field near a black hole. Com-pared to other 3D reconstruction or tomography settings, this task poses two significant challenges: first, rays near black holes follow curved paths dictated by general relativ-ity, and second, we only observe measurements from a sin-gle viewpoint. Our method captures the unknown emission field using a continuous volumetric function parameterized by a coordinate-based neural network, and uses knowledge of Keplerian orbital dynamics to establish correspondence between 3D points over time. Together, these enable BH-NeRF to recover accurate 3D emission fields, even in chal-lenging situations with sparse measurements and uncertain orbital dynamics. This work takes the first steps in showing how future measurements from the Event Horizon Telescope could be used to recover evolving 3D emission around the supermassive black hole in our Galactic center. 1.

Introduction
The Event Horizon Telescope (EHT), which recently captured the first image of a black hole, opens the door to a new era in black hole research [42]. We are now able to image the direct environment around a black hole and re-solve image features on the scale of an event horizon. This unprecedented resolution is achieved by linking radio tele-scopes across the globe to synchronously observe an astro-nomical source [1, 5, 11], a technique known as Very Large
Baseline Interferometry [43]. Although a black hole itself is not visible, its imprint or “shadow” on the emission from the surrounding hot gas is what the EHT aims to image.
The two candidate black holes within reach of the EHT are M87∗ and Sagittarius A∗ (SgrA∗). The first black hole
∗ Authors contributed equally to this work.
† NASA Hubble Fellowship Program, Einstein Fellow.
Figure 1. We formulate and present an approach for a novel to-mography: recovering the emission distribution of flares in or-bit around a black hole using observations captured from a sin-gle viewpoint over time. This is achieved by leveraging expected physics around a black hole: gravitational lensing and emission flow modeled by Keplerian orbital dynamics.
In this example, observations are simulated telescope measurements that place a sparse set of constraints on the Fourier components of the 2D im-ages images over time (top row); The image formation model ac-counts for ray trajectories that are curved due to gravitational lens-ing. The orientation of the observed projection plane is indicated in green. Our method, BH-NeRF, recovers a representation of the underlying 3D emission from the sparse telescope measurements. image of M87∗ [42] was constructed from measurements collected over an entire night, with the underlying assump-tion that its emission is static throughout acquisition.
In contrast, SgrA∗, the black hole in our Galactic center, is far more dynamic and displays strong flares of emission up to several times a day [19]. A potential explanation for these flares are compact bright emission spots [8] in orbit around the black hole, referred to as hot-spots.
In this work, we formulate and propose an approach for a novel tomography problem to reconstruct these dynamic events (Fig. 1). In contrast to previous works [4, 23, 27], which focus on recovering 2D image plane dynamics, our
work recovers the underlying dynamic 3D emission dis-tribution (i.e., 4D spatiotemporal volume). However, re-constructing volumetric emission in this setting faces two salient challenges. The first challenge is that light rays which reach the EHT telescopes do not follow straight lines that regularly sample space. Instead, the rays follow curved paths due to the strong gravitational field around black holes. This effect, predicted by general relativity (GR), is known as gravitational lensing since massive objects, such as black holes, act as lenses and bend light. The second challenge is the EHT only observes from a single fixed viewpoint, as opposed to the multi-view observations ac-quired in other tomography settings.
In this paper, we introduce a novel tomography that leverages expected physics around a black hole to recover the time-varying volumetric emission from a single obser-vational direction. In particular, we present a promising so-lution, BH-NeRF, that represents the 3D emission as a con-tinuous function using a coordinate-based neural network and makes use of our knowledge of Keplerian orbit dynam-ics to relate 3D emission points across time.
Our approach builds upon recent advances in neural rep-resentations of radiance fields [34] and generalizes them to account for curved ray trajectories. Our experiments demonstrate promising first steps towards recovering the 3D dynamics around a black hole, a high-priority task for as-tronomy research over the upcoming decade [36]. 2.