Abstract
We study the problem of weakly semi-supervised ob-ject detection with points (WSSOD-P), where the training data is combined by a small set of fully annotated images with bounding boxes and a large set of weakly-labeled im-ages with only a single point annotated for each instance.
The core of this task is to train a point-to-box regressor on well-labeled images that can be used to predict cred-ible bounding boxes for each point annotation. We chal-lenge the prior belief that existing CNN-based detectors are not compatible with this task. Based on the classic R-CNN architecture, we propose an effective point-to-box re-gressor: Group R-CNN. Group R-CNN first uses instance-level proposal grouping to generate a group of proposals for each point annotation and thus can obtain a high re-call rate. To better distinguish different instances and im-prove precision, we propose instance-level proposal assign-ment to replace the vanilla assignment strategy adopted in original R-CNN methods. As naive instance-level as-signment brings converging difficulty, we propose instance-aware representation learning which consists of instance-aware feature enhancement and instance-aware parame-ter generation to overcome this issue. Comprehensive ex-periments on the MS-COCO benchmark demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. Specifically, Group R-CNN significantly outperforms the prior method Point DETR by 3.9 mAP with 5% well-labeled images, which is the most challenging scenario. The source code can be found at https://github.com/jshilong/GroupRCNN. 1.

Introduction
Object detection has witnessed great improvements with the development of network architectures and dataset con-struction in the past few years. However, advanced ob-ject detectors usually require training on a large number
*Equal contribution of images with accurate bounding box annotations, which are very time-consuming and expensive to obtain. To re-lieve the burden of human labeling, previous studies pro-pose weakly- [2, 11, 13, 21, 32] and semi-supervised meth-ods [8, 18, 24, 31] for object detection, which adopts a small portion of well-annotated images alongside abun-dant weakly-annotated images and unlabeled images, re-spectively. Weakly semi-supervised object detection (WS-SOD) [28] takes goods from both worlds. By replac-ing the unlabeled images in semi-supervised detection with weakly-labeled images, it achieves a good balance between labeling costs and model performance. One step further,
WSSOD with point annotations (WSSOD-P) labels an in-stance with a single point so as to provide both category and location information with minimal labeling cost. The time cost of labeling points is comparable with that of pro-viding image-level annotations [1, 4], which is substantially lower than bounding box annotations.
Prior work [4] proposes the following pipeline to lever-age point annotations. (1) train a point-to-box regressor us-ing images with only bounding box annotations. To simu-late the process of translating points into bounding boxes, points are randomly sampled within bounding boxes of in-stances as point annotations. (2) After training, the regres-sor is used to transform point annotations on weakly-labeled (3) Finally, images to pseudo bounding box annotations. any object detector can be trained with both well-labeled images and pseudo-labeled images in a supervised fashion.
The core of this task then boils down to designing an accu-rate point-to-box regressor.
Point DETR [4] claims that the CNN-based detector per-forms poorly as a point-to-box regressor, but we argue it does not hold true based on the following in-depth analysis.
On one hand, we find that CNN models in prior work only generate a single proposal with the feature vector located at the annotated point (projected on the feature map). The quality of such a proposal can be quite low, resulting in a low recall rate since annotated points can deviate from ob-ject centers and are less informative for box regression. To
proposals from different groups share the same feature map and are also convolved with the same fixed param-eters, positive proposals in one group and negative pro-posals in another group can have similar convolution out-puts. However, they are assigned to completely opposite optimization targets, this contradiction can hinder model convergence. To tackle this problem, we propose instance-aware representation learning, consisting of instance-aware feature enhancement and instance-aware parameter gener-ation. Specifically, we use point annotations to compute instance-aware relative coordinates, with which to construct instance-aware feature maps. To further distinguish features of proposals from different groups, we use both instance-aware features and the annotated points’ category embed-dings to generate instance-aware model parameters. By convolving the instance-aware features and the instance-aware parameters, we successfully mitigate the converg-ing issue brought by naive instance assignment and obtain superior performance.
To highlight our key designs and the proposed general framework as a point-to-box regressor, we name our regres-sor Group R-CNN. Compared with the previous state-of-the-art method Point DETR which is based on the trans-former architecture, our proposed Group R-CNN has the following advantages: (1) Group R-CNN can take advan-tage of the feature pyramid network [14] for multi-scale proposal generation, while Point DETR [4] can not naively adopt FPN. (2) Group R-CNN inherits the convergence su-periority from CNNs, and thus converges better and faster than Point DETR, especially under the low well-labeled data regime [6] (See Appendix for details).
We conduct extensive experiments on MS-COCO dataset, using various percentages of labeled images to showcase the effectiveness of Group R-CNN. Group R-CNN outperforms the existing transformer-based method
Point DETR by a large margin under different experimen-tal protocols while only requiring half of the training bud-get. To be specific, our Group R-CNN outperforms Point
DETR by 3.9 mAP when only 5% images are well-labeled by bounding boxes. Thus, Group R-CNN achieves both bet-ter performance and faster convergence over previous state-of-the-art. 2.