Abstract 1.

Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) has recently gained pop-ularity for its impressive novel view synthesis ability. This paper studies the problem of hallucinated NeRF: i.e., re-covering a realistic NeRF at a different time of day from a group of tourism images. Existing solutions adopt NeRF with a controllable appearance embedding to render novel views under various conditions, but they cannot render view-consistent images with an unseen appearance. To solve this problem, we present an end-to-end framework for constructing a hallucinated NeRF, dubbed as Ha-NeRF.
Speciﬁcally, we propose an appearance hallucination mod-ule to handle time-varying appearances and transfer them to novel views. Considering the complex occlusions of tourism images, we introduce an anti-occlusion module to decompose the static subjects for visibility accurately. Ex-perimental results on synthetic data and real tourism photo collections demonstrate that our method can hallucinate the desired appearances and render occlusion-free images from different views. The project and supplementary materials are available at https://rover-xingyu.github.io/Ha-NeRF/.
*Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
†Corresponding Author.
In recent years, synthesizing photo-realistic novel views of a scene has become a research hotspot along with the rapid development of neural rendering technologies. Imag-ine you want to visit the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin and en-joy the landscapes at different times and weathers, but you cannot because of the coronavirus pandemic. For this hal-lucinated experience to be as engaging as possible, photo-realistic images from different views that can change with the weather, time, and other factors are necessary.
To achieve this, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [33] and its following methods [25, 40, 58] have shown a remarkable capacity to recover the 3D geometry and appearance, giv-ing the user an immersive feeling of physically being there.
However, one signiﬁcant drawback of NeRF is that they re-quire a group of images without variable illumination and moving objects, i.e., the radiance of the scene is constant and visible for each view. Unfortunately, most images of tourist landmarks are internet photos captured at different times and occluded by various objects. Most NeRF-based methods would integrate variable appearances and transient occluders into the 3D volume when they occur, which dis-turbs the real scene in the volume. How to synthesize the occlusion-free views from images with variable appear-ances and occluders remains to be solved.
Martin-Brualla et al. [28] attempt to tackle the aforemen-tioned problem by proposing a NeRF in the Wild method (NeRF-W). They optimize an appearance embedding for each input image to address variable appearances and use a transient volume to decompose static components and their occlusion. Compared to NeRF, NeRF-W takes a step towards recovering a realistic world from tourism images with variable appearances and occluders. However, NeRF-W implements a controllable appearance by the optimized embeddings from train samples, making it need to optimize the embeddings when given a new image and can not hal-lucinate an appearance from other datasets. Furthermore,
NeRF-W tries to optimize a transient volume for each input image with a transient embedding as input, which is highly ill-posed due to the randomness of transient occluders. And this leads to the inaccurate decomposition of the scene and further causes the entanglement of appearances and occlu-sion, e.g., results in the transient volume to remember the sunset glow.
To address these limitations, we present a hallucinated
NeRF (Ha-NeRF) framework that can hallucinate the real-istic radiance ﬁeld from unconstrained tourist images with variable appearances and occluders, as shown in Fig. 1.
For appearance hallucination, we propose a CNN-based ap-pearance encoder and a view-consistent appearance loss to transfer consistent photometric appearance in different views. This design gives our method the ﬂexibility to trans-fer the appearance of unlearned images. For anti-occlusion, we utilize an MLP to learn an image-dependent 2D visibil-ity mask with an anti-occlusion loss that can automatically separate the static components with high accuracy during training. Experiments on several landmarks conﬁrm the su-perior of the proposed method in terms of appearance hal-lucination and anti-occlusion.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows: 1. The Ha-NeRF is proposed to recover the appearance hallucination radiance ﬁelds from a group of images with variable appearances and occluders. 2. An appearance hallucination module is developed to transfer the view-consistent appearance to novel views. 3. An anti-occlusion module is modeled image-dependently to perceive the ray visibility. 2.