Abstract
Multi-view clustering has received increasing attention due to its effectiveness in fusing complementary informa-tion without manual annotations. Most previous methods hold the assumption that each instance appears in all views.
However, it is not uncommon to see that some views may contain some missing instances, which gives rise to in-complete multi-view clustering (IMVC) in literature. Al-though many IMVC methods have been recently proposed, they always encounter high complexity and expensive time
In expenditure from being applied into large-scale tasks. this paper, we present a flexible highly-efficient incomplete large-scale multi-view clustering approach based on bipar-tite graph framework to solve these issues. Specifically, we formalize multi-view anchor learning and incomplete bipar-tite graph into a unified framework, which coordinates with each other to boost cluster performance. By introducing the flexible bipartite graph framework to handle IMVC for the first practice, our proposed method enjoys linear complexity respecting to instance numbers, which is more applicable for large-scale IMVC tasks. Comprehensive experimental results on various benchmark datasets demonstrate the ef-fectiveness and efficiency of our proposed algorithm against other IMVC competitors. The code is available at 1. 1.

Introduction
Multi-view clustering (MVC) comprehensively inte-grates diverse source information to divide data samples with similar structures or patterns into the same cluster without stressful label annotations [4, 10, 12, 14, 17, 19, 20,
In recent years, numerous multi-view 24, 30, 44, 46, 48].
*Corresponding author 1https://github.com/wangsiwei2010/CVPR22-IMVC-CBG clustering algorithms have been proposed in computer vi-sion and machine learning communities, which can ba-sically be categorized into the following four categories: co-training style, multiple kernel clustering (MKC), non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) and graph clustering.
The co-training strategy for MVC proposes to alternately combine multiple clustering results which provide predic-tions for the unlabeled data of other views [8]. By this way, besides extracting the specific information from the corre-sponding view, the clustering labels can reach an agree-ment on various views. By following the multiple ker-nel learning framework, MKC methods unitize kernel ma-trix from a group of pre-defined kernel matrices in Hilbert space [4, 17, 19, 21, 33, 42, 43]. Besides, the NMF applies matrix factorization into multi-view clustering with unified latent space and graph clustering approaches optimize a unified graph structure from multi-view data representation
[2, 3, 25, 27, 28, 50]. In addition, deep multi-view clustering (DMVC) has also been intensively studied [13, 31, 38, 40].
Although existing MVC algorithms have been proposed to improve performances in various application tasks, most of them hold a common assumption: all of the views are complete. Unfortunately, it is not uncommon to see that some instances may be inaccessible from some views. For example, for web-page analysis, some have text, audio, and picture features while others may contain only one or two kinds [45]. Besides, patients may fail to do all kinds of medical testing due to financial inconvenience which leads to sample incompleteness in corresponding views. The in-completeness causes heavy performance degeneration or even execution failure for existing MVC algorithms, which makes incomplete multi-view clustering (IMVC) a chal-lenging problem.
To deal with IMVC problem, a series of pioneer work have been proposed in literature. Existing incomplete multi-view clustering can be divided into three categories: ma-trix factorization (MF)-based [6, 9, 26], graph or kernel-based [18, 21, 36, 37, 39] and deep learning [13, 31, 38, 40].
MF-based IMVC approaches attempt to establish a unified representation with incomplete data across various views.
For example, PVC is the first attempt to adopt the NMF to derive the consensus latent representation of incomplete data [9]. Following PVC, MIC [26] then introduces the weighted NMF and ℓ2,1 regularizer to boost performance.
Moreover, Hu et al. propose to align multi-view informa-tion based on semi-NMF representation alignment and ba-sic space alignment [6]. The graph or kernel-based IMC approach attempts to recover the similarity graph or ker-nel matrix that is consistent across multiple views in var-ious perspectives. Liu et al. propose to unify incomplete filling and clustering into one framework to boost the clus-tering performance [21]. With the widespread development of deep learning, many researchers extract deep informa-tion via deep neural networks to address the IMVC prob-lem. Li et al. design a deep IMVC model which could si-multaneously learn the representation and recovery data by contrastive learning [13]. However, the intensive compu-tational complexity, complicated optimization process and high time expenditure prevent all the existing algorithms from being applied into large-scale tasks. Moreover, more flexible IMVC framework should be developed to handle arbitrary view incomplete other than just two.
In order to solve the aforementioned issues, we present a flexible and highly-efficient incomplete large-scale multi-view clustering approach based on consensus bipartite graph framework termed as IMVC-CBG in this paper.
Firstly, we formalize IMVC problem under incomplete bi-partite graph framework, which is the first practice for this community. Instead of fusing large pair-wise similarity ma-trices from multiple views in the previous study, we unify anchor learning and incomplete bipartite graph construc-tion together to make instances share the consensus bipartite graph and ensure structure consistency across views. We also provide the interpretation of our method with proba-bility model. Then, a four-step alternative optimization al-gorithm with proved convergence is proposed to efficiently solve the resultant optimization problem. By virtue of the proposed novel framework, our proposed method enjoys linear complexity respecting to instance numbers, which is more applicable for large-scale clustering tasks. Compre-hensive experimental results on various benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our pro-posed algorithm against other IMVC competitors. Remark-ably, ours is the first algorithm that can efficiently and effec-tively run on datasets with more than 100000 samples with 64G RAM in IMVC community. The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows,
• We propose a flexible IMVC approach (IMVC-CBG)
Table 1. Main notations used throughout the paper.
Notation n v k m
α ∈ Rv×1 di d
X(i) ∈ Rdi×n
A(i) ∈ Rn×ni
W(i) ∈ Rk×di
S ∈ Rn×n
C ∈ Rk×m
Z ∈ Rm×n
Meaning number of samples number of views number of clusters number of selected anchors view coefficient vector dimension for the i-th view i=1 di data matrix for the i-th view missing index for i-th view projection matrix for the i-th view similarity matrix consensus anchor matrix consensus anchor graph (cid:80)v with incomplete bipartite graph fusion to handle scal-ability issues in the previous study. By introducing a flexible framework to handle arbitrary view incom-pleteness for the first practice, IMVC-CBG is a pio-neering work that integrates IMVC and bipartite graph into a joint framework.
• Comparing to the existing IMVC approaches, we si-multaneously utilize the unified bipartite graph to cap-ture the complementary information and learn to re-cover clustering structures across incomplete views.
• We design a four-step alternative optimization algo-rithm to effectively and efficiently solve IMVC-CBG with proven convergence. Our proposed method en-joys linear complexity respecting to instance numbers, which is more applicable for large-scale IMVC tasks.
Comprehensive experimental results clearly demon-strate the effectiveness and efficiency of our proposed approach. 2.