Abstract
Light curtain systems are designed for detecting the pres-ence of objects within a user-defined 3D region of space, which has many applications across vision and robotics.
However, the shape of light curtains have so far been limited to ruled surfaces, i.e., surfaces composed of straight lines.
In this work, we propose Holocurtains: a light-efficient ap-proach to producing light curtains of arbitrary shape. The key idea is to synchronize a rolling-shutter camera with a 2D holographic projector, which steers (rather than block) light to generate bright structured light patterns. Our pro-totype projector uses a binary digital micromirror device (DMD) to generate the holographic interference patterns at high speeds. Our system produces 3D light curtains that cannot be achieved with traditional light curtain setups and thus enables all-new applications, including the ability to simultaneously capture multiple light curtains in a single frame, detect subtle changes in scene geometry, and trans-form any 3D surface into an optical touch interface. 1.

Introduction
A light curtain is an optical barrier that detects the pres-ence or absence of objects within regions of 3D space [2].
For example, light curtains are used in elevators and garage doors, in order to keep doors open when a person or object is in the doorway. Safety light curtains also are used in en-vironments containing hazardous equipment (e.g., machine tools, robotic arms) to protect personnel from injury, by automatically turning off dangerous machinery whenever a curtain is breached.
These light curtains involve two key components: emit-ters and receivers. Traditional light curtains position an emitter to directly illuminate a receiver through direct line of sight. If an obstacle blocks the light traveling from the emitter to the receiver, the drop in the detected light signal triggers an event. While extremely reliable and simple de-vices, light curtains must be physically configured for their specific environments, which is a laborious process.
Wang et al. [35] recently proposed a programmable ap-(a) An arm passes through a toy cow-shaped light curtain (b) A foam board sweeps through the light curtain
Figure 1. Our Holocurtain system turns a user-defined volume or surface (e.g., a toy cow) into a 3D light curtain. (a) An arm passes through the light curtain. In the left image, blue pixels represent the light curtain and green pixels highlight areas intersecting the light curtain. The right image represents the raw data from the system used to detect the intersections. (b) The left image shows a foam board moving through the light curtain. The right image is a composition of raw measurements captured at different instances in time, where the colors represent different frames. proach to generate light curtains through triangulation. A scene is illuminated with a laser line, and the response is measured with a line scan camera [35] or a rolling-shutter camera [5]. The intersection of the illumination and sens-ing planes produces a 3D line (see Fig. 2(a)). If an object touches this line, light from the source reflects off the ob-ject and reaches the camera—triggering an event. Rapidly changing the position of the illumination and sensing planes (e.g., with mirror galvanometers) creates ruled surfaces, i.e., surfaces defined by unions of straight lines. Triangulation light curtains offer several benefits, including the ability to program the shape in real time and operate under strong ambient light, which can potentially be leveraged for new safety applications including assisted or autonomous navi-gation through unknown environments [3, 4, 26].
Despite these advantages, a key limitation is that these light curtains have been fundamentally restricted to being ruled surfaces. Moreover, prior systems offer only one de-gree of freedom over the positions of the laser line and scan line, limiting triangulation light curtains to an even smaller subset of ruled surfaces. Current prototype systems are only designed to produce either predominantly vertical cur-tains [5, 35] or horizontal curtains [32, 34].
In this work, we remove the constraints on the shape of light curtains by exploring a novel approach to struc-tured illumination. Specifically, we replace the laser line with a projector capable of generating arbitrary illumina-tion patterns by redistributing light at high speeds (up to 10 kHz). We propose using 2D computer-generated holog-raphy to produce structured light patterns, which has the ad-vantage of having much higher light efficiency than conven-tional projectors. When synchronized with a rolling-shutter camera, our system is capable of generating light curtains of arbitrary shape, as illustrated in Fig. 2(b). Moreover, we demonstrate the ability to multiplex multiple light curtains into a single measurement. We leverage these new capa-bilities for a number of new applications, including optical disturbance detection and 3D optical touch sensing.
The contributions of our work include the following:
• a holographic light curtain technique, capable of gen-erating curtains of arbitrary shape;
• a spatial multiplexing strategy to capture the response from multiple curtains in a single image; and
• an approach to structured lighting that involves high-speed and light-efficient 2D holography. 2.