Abstract
We introduce A100 (Aesthetic 100) to assess the aes-thetic ability of the fashion compatibility models. To date, it is the first work to address the AI model’s aesthetic ability with detailed characterization based on the profes-sional fashion domain knowledge. A100 has several de-sirable characteristics: 1. Completeness.
It covers all types of standards in the fashion aesthetic system through two tests, namely LAT (Liberalism Aesthetic Test) and AAT (Academicism Aesthetic Test); 2. Reliability.
It is train-ing data agnostic and consistent with major indicators. It provides a fair and objective judgment for model compari-son. 3. Explainability. Better than all previous indicators, the A100 further identifies essential characteristics of fash-ion aesthetics, thus showing the model’s performance on more fine-grained dimensions, such as Color, Balance, Ma-terial, etc. Experimental results prove the advance of the
A100 in the aforementioned aspects. All data can be found at https://github.com/AemikaChow/AiDLab-fAshIon-Data. 1.

Introduction
Fashion compatibility learning is a task to measure the compatibility among a set of fashion items [2, 3, 11, 12, 18, 28, 30, 31]. Utilizing the aesthetic ability of these methods for cross-selling is the most common strategy for online re-tailers. Naturally, a good indicator of a model’s aesthetic ability is vital for both method improvement and real-world fashion applications. Current practices to evaluate the fash-ion compatibility models most focus on retrieving or rank-ing performance such as Recall [8], mAP [15], MRR [17], etc. AUC [26] is the commonly adopted metric to evaluate the compatibility classification accuracy. FITB (Fill-in-the-black) accuracy [9] is introduced to evaluate fashion recom-mendation methods. However, none of the existing indica-tors focus on reflecting the model’s aesthetic ability [21,32].
* Corresponding author.
Figure 1. Overview. We introduce the A100 (Aesthetic 100) for fashion compatibility model evaluation. The LAT and AAT reflect the overall performance of fashion compatibility models covering all types of aesthetic standards in fashion. Meanwhile, the A100 can also indicate the characteristic performance, which is not al-ways aligned with the overall performance.
The aesthetic ability here refers to how the model can understand fashion items’ compatibility and perception of their beauty. Generally, aesthetic system in fashion consists of two types standard: Bottom-up and Top-down [6,7,10].
The Bottom-up aesthetic means that the fashion from the crowd further affects the mainstream. This type of standard is a collective consensus that will be formed when the num-ber of people agreeing on one thing is large enough. We emphasize that it is a large number of people have a consen-sus on the same thing. On the contrary, the Top-down aes-thetic means fashion from professional knowledge and will be widely accepted by the crowd from its essence. This kind of standard faithfully follows the created beauty according to domain knowledge. The Bottom-up aesthetic is a kind of collective consensus, and thus, the public will accept it by nature, while the Top-down aesthetic can be regarded as
luxury fashion, i.e., is pre-defined and then exerts a substan-tial influence to lead the public to accept it. Furthermore, we argue that there are three considerations to examine when designing the evaluation protocol: 1. Completeness. A relatively objective consensus to serve as the basis of ref-erence is essential to the quantitative assessment, while the systematic standard is key to a comprehensive evaluation. 2.
Practicality. It refers to choosing a feasible way to perform the evaluation. 3. Reliability. The content of the evaluation should be professional and reliable.
To this end, as shown in Figure 1, unlike previous eval-uations only focused on overall performance, we propose
A100 (Aesthetic 100), with a more comprehensive evalu-ation. Specifically, we introduce two tests with multiple-choice questions, namely LAT (Liberalism Aesthetic Test) and AAT (Academicism Aesthetic Test), to cover Bottom-up and Top-down standards in the fashion aesthetic sys-tem. The LAT represents the aesthetic standard of Bottom-up. The source images are collected from mainstream outfit datasets [9, 23, 25]. The questions are automatically gen-erated following the proposed Outfit Generation Principle and then manually verified by experts with a fashion back-ground. We ensure that, for each question, there has already formed a collective consensus in a small group of people, i.e., has only one correct answer. Finally, we build a website and release the LAT to the fashion community for obtaining the ground truth. It is worth noting that the answers of each participant are not the same. Thus, the LAT has two scores: 1. LATs (LAT score). The hard score follows the majority, i.e., the most selected choice of each question will be scor-ing 1 and others are 0. 2. mLATs (mean LATs). The soft score considers the minority, i.e., the score of each choice equals the probability of it being selected.
In addition, AAT represents the aesthetic standard of
Top-down. The creation of the AAT has significant highly professional requirements, and thus we introduce the do-main power from the fashion community (all participating designers will be claimed in the acknowledgment). After detailed investigation and discussion, we conclude six di-mensions that should be examined when judging the aes-thetic ability of the model, including Color, Style, Occasion,
Season, Material, and Balance. Then, the questions and choices in the AAT are rigorously designed following these dimensions and their sub-dimensions. Each question is lim-ited to focusing on testing the model’s performance from only one dimension. This strategy enables A100 to uniquely show the characteristic performance of the model on a fine-grained level in addition to the overall performance.
The accuracy is denoted as AATs (AAT score), while the accuracy of each dimension set is called detailed index, e.g., Color Index, Style Index, Occasion Index, etc. We perform analysis across quantitative and qualitative results to demonstrate that our evaluations are more reliable than the previous indicators. Meanwhile, we present the results showing the explainability of the proposed protocol. The main contributions are summarized as the following:
• We do the first work to evaluate fashion compatibil-ity quality based on the professional fashion domain knowledge.
• We introduce A100 covering systematic aesthetic stan-dards, which can provide charateristical performance in addition to overal performance.
• We demonstrate the reliability and explainability of the new evaluations through experiments. 2.