Abstract
We aim to understand how actions are performed and identify subtle differences, such as ‘fold firmly’ vs. ‘fold gently’. To this end, we propose a method which recog-nizes adverbs across different actions. However, such fine-grained annotations are difficult to obtain and their long-tailed nature makes it challenging to recognize adverbs in rare action-adverb compositions. Our approach therefore uses semi-supervised learning with multiple adverb pseudo-labels to leverage videos with only action labels. Combined with adaptive thresholding of these pseudo-adverbs we are able to make efficient use of the available data while tackling the long-tailed distribution. Additionally, we gather adverb annotations for three existing video retrieval datasets, which allows us to introduce the new tasks of recognizing adverbs in unseen action-adverb compositions and unseen domains.
Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, which outperforms prior work in recognizing adverbs and semi-supervised works adapted for adverb recognition. We also show how adverbs can relate fine-grained actions. 1.

Introduction
This paper aims to recognize fine-grained differences be-tween actions such as whether a person is swimming slowly or quickly or cutting evenly or unevenly. Understanding how actions are performed is key to understanding the actions themselves and their outcomes. Improved perception of the action manner would allow both humans and robots to better imitate actions, as well as better discrimination between fine-grained action categories, where the difference can simply be how much an object moves [18]. Previous works can address the question of what is happening in a video [79], when an action is happening [67], who is performing an action [72] and where it is taking place [43]. However, very few works have looked at how actions happen, as we do in this paper.
In language, how an action is performed can be described with adverbs, thus we focus on recognizing such adverbs.
Two works have previously investigated adverb recogni-tion [12, 51]. However, these works either focus on adverbs describing facial expressions and moods [51] or only studied a handful of adverbs [12] limiting the ways to answer “how
Figure 1. We answer how actions are happening by learning adverbs of different actions. We do this in a semi-supervised manner where we use action-only videos with multi-adverb pseudo-labeling. is the action being performed?”. This highlights a key chal-lenge in learning adverbs and more generally fine-grained video understanding: the time-consuming data collection.
The more subtle the differences between videos, the more difficult it is to collect a large amount of labels. To address these challenges and better describe how actions are per-formed, we scale up the number of adverbs which can be learned by utilizing videos with only action labels. Further-more, multiple adverbs can co-occur and apply to the same action. We can thus better learn adverbs from videos in a semi-supervised fashion by obtaining extra adverb labels through multi-adverb pseudo-labeling (see Fig. 1).
As our main contribution, we propose to reformulate the adverb recognition problem as a semi-supervised learning problem. In Sec. 3, we propose the first method for semi-supervised learning of adverbs, in which we apply multiple adverb pseudo-labels to actions and use an adaptive threshold to cope with the long-tail distribution of adverbs. In Sec. 4, we create several new adverb recognition benchmarks by automatically mining action-adverb pairs from the captions in existing video retrieval datasets [29, 64, 69]. Alongside this we propose two new tasks for addressing how actions happen: first recognizing adverbs in unseen compositions and second in recognizing adverbs across domains. In Sec. 5, we demonstrate our multi-adverb pseudo-labeling approach obtains a considerable improvement over prior works in recognizing seen compositions of verbs and adverbs as well as improving generalization in these new tasks.
2.