Abstract
Capsule networks are designed to present the objects by a set of parts and their relationships, which provide an insight into the procedure of visual perception. Although recent works have shown the success of capsule networks on simple objects like digits, the human faces with homologous structures, which are suitable for capsules to describe, have not been explored.
In this paper, we propose a
Hierarchical Parsing Capsule Network (HP-Capsule) for unsupervised face subpart-part discovery. When browsing large-scale face images without labels, the network first encodes the frequently observed patterns with a set of explainable subpart capsules. the subpart cap-sules are assembled into part-level capsules through a
Transformer-based Parsing Module (TPM) to learn the compositional relations between them. During training,
Then,
*Corresponding author. as the face hierarchy is progressively built and refined, the part capsules adaptively encode the face parts with semantic consistency. HP-Capsule extends the application of capsule networks from digits to human faces and takes a step forward to show how the neural networks understand homologous objects without human intervention. Besides,
HP-Capsule gives unsupervised face segmentation results by the covered regions of part capsules, enabling qualitative and quantitative evaluation. Experiments on BP4D and
Multi-PIE datasets show the effectiveness of our method. 1.

Introduction
Psychological studies [12, 22, 27] reveal that: The recog-nition procedure is often assigned with hierarchical struc-tural descriptions by parsing the shapes into components and organizing them with their spatial relationships. This statement is consistent with the improvements of various
proposed to constrain the process of reconstructing the input image with capsule templates, so that the object is spatially decomposed into subparts rather than holistic representations. Then, the discovered subparts are regarded as visual words and sent to TPM to be aggregated to higher-level part capsules, where the subpart-to-part hierarchy is naturally built.
Several constraints are incorporated to preserve the shape and appearance consistency so that the generated parts have more prominent semantics.
As a by-product, the covered regions of part capsules can be regarded as the segmentation maps, which can be used for the unsupervised face segmentation task, en-abling the evaluation of our method. Compared with other unsupervised segmentation methods, HP-Capsule shows better semantic consistency and provides more interpretable descriptions about the discovered parts, including the visu-alizable templates and the statistics on presence and pose.
To summarize, the main contributions of this work are:
• This paper proposes a Hierarchical Parsing Capsule
Network (HP-Capsule) for unsupervised face hier-archy discovery. HP-Capsule provides an insight into how the neural network understands homologous structures without human intervention.
• In the subpart discovery process, we propose a Vis-ibility Activation Function (VAF), which enforces the network to concentrate on template regions with higher visibility, to ensure the objects are decomposed into localized subparts rather than holistic representations.
• A Transformer-based Parsing Module (TPM) is pro-posed to aggregate subparts into parts, constructing the subpart-part face hierarchy. The covered regions of part capsules can also be used for unsupervised face segmentation. Experiments on BP4D and Multi-PIE show the effectiveness of our method. 2.