Abstract
For image segmentation, the current standard is to per-form pixel-level optimization and inference in Euclidean output embedding spaces through linear hyperplanes.
In this work, we show that hyperbolic manifolds provide a valuable alternative for image segmentation and propose a tractable formulation of hierarchical pixel-level classiﬁca-tion in hyperbolic space. Hyperbolic Image Segmentation opens up new possibilities and practical beneﬁts for seg-mentation, such as uncertainty estimation and boundary in-formation for free, zero-label generalization, and increased performance in low-dimensional output embeddings. 1.

Introduction
A ubiquitous goal in visual representation learning is to obtain discriminative and generalizable embeddings. Such visual embeddings are learned in a deep and highly non-linear fashion. On top, a linear layer separates categories through Euclidean hyperplanes. The choice for a zero cur-* Equal contribution vature Euclidean embedding space, although a de facto standard, requires careful re-consideration as it has direct consequences for how well a task can be optimized given the latent structure that is inherently present in both the data and the category space [19, 22, 29].
This work takes inspiration from recent literature advo-cating hyperbolic manifolds as embedding spaces for ma-chine learning and computer vision tasks. Foundational work showed that hyperbolic manifolds are able to em-bed hierarchies and tree-like structures with minimal dis-tortion [29]. Follow up work has demonstrated the ben-eﬁts of hyperboles for various tasks with latent hierarchi-cal structures, from text embedding [42, 55] to graph infer-ence [8, 12, 22]. Notably, Khrulkov et al. [19] showed that hyperbolic embeddings also have profound connections to visual data, due to latent hierarchical structures present in vision datasets. This connection has brought along early hy-perbolic success in computer vision for few-shot and zero-shot learning [15, 19, 23], unsupervised learning [32, 46], and video recognition [25, 40].
Common amongst current hyperbolic computer vision works is that the task at hand is global, i.e. an entire im-age or video is represented by a single vector in the hy-perbolic embedding space [3, 19, 23, 25]. Here, our goal is to take hyperbolic deep learning to the pixel level. This generalization is however not trivial. The change of mani-fold brings different formulations for basic operations such as addition and multiplication, each with different spatial complexity. Speciﬁcally, the additional spatial complexity that comes with the M¨obius addition as part of the hyper-bolic multinomial logistic regression makes it intractable to simultaneously optimize or infer all pixels of even a sin-gle image. Here, we propose an equivalent re-formulation of multinomial logistic regression in the Poincar´e ball that bypasses the explicit computation of the M¨obius addition, allowing for simultaneous segmentation optimization on batches of images in hyperbolic space. We furthermore outline how to incorporate hierarchical knowledge amongst labels in the hyperbolic embedding space, as previously advocated in image and video recognition [23, 25]. The proposed approach is general and can be plugged on top of any segmentation architecture. The code is available at https://github.com/MinaGhadimiAtigh/
HyperbolicImageSegmentation.
We perform a number of analyses to showcase the ef-fect and new possibilities that come with Hyperbolic Im-age Segmentation. We present the following: (i) Hyper-bolic embeddings provide natural measures for uncertainty estimation and for semantic boundary estimation in image segmentation, see Figure 1. Different from Bayesian un-certainty estimation, our approach requires no additional parameters or multiple forward passes, i.e. this informa-tion comes for free. (ii): Hyperbolic embeddings with hi-erarchical knowledge provide better zero-label generaliza-tion than Euclidean counterparts, i.e. hyperboles improve (iii): Hyperbolic em-reasoning over unseen categories. beddings are preferred for fewer embedding dimensions.
Low-dimensional effectiveness is a cornerstone in hyper-bolic deep learning [29]. We ﬁnd that these beneﬁts extend to image segmentation, with potential for explainability and on-device segmentation [3]. We believe these ﬁndings bring new insights and opportunities to image segmentation. 2.