Abstract
The lack of large-scale noisy-clean image pairs restricts supervised denoising methods’ deployment in actual ap-plications. While existing unsupervised methods are able to learn image denoising without ground-truth clean im-ages, they either show poor performance or work under impractical settings (e.g., paired noisy images). In this pa-per, we present a practical unsupervised image denoising method to achieve state-of-the-art denoising performance.
Our method only requires single noisy images and a noise model, which is easily accessible in practical raw image de-noising. It performs two steps iteratively: (1) Constructing a noisier-noisy dataset with random noise from the noise model; (2) training a model on the noisier-noisy dataset and using the trained model to refine noisy images to ob-tain the targets used in the next round. We further approx-imate our full iterative method with a fast algorithm for more efficient training while keeping its original high per-formance. Experiments on real-world, synthetic, and cor-related noise show that our proposed unsupervised denois-ing approach has superior performances over existing un-supervised methods and competitive performance with su-pervised methods. In addition, we argue that existing de-noising datasets are of low quality and contain only a small number of scenes. To evaluate raw image denoising perfor-mance in real-world applications, we build a high-quality raw image dataset SenseNoise-500 that contains 500 real-life scenes. The dataset can serve as a strong benchmark for better evaluating raw image denoising. Code and dataset will be released1 1.

Introduction
In recent years, deep neural networks have made great progress in image denoising. The mainstream of the ad-vances is powered by supervised learning-based approaches
[6, 11, 13, 22, 29]. However, large-scale datasets with high-quality ground-truth are still unavailable due to high human 1https://github.com/zhangyi-3/IDR
Figure 1. Top row: The training targets created at different epochs. They have been refined progressively in our approach.
Bottom row: Comparison with previous works: DBSN [31] (ECCV 2020), Noisier2Noise [23] (CVPR 2020). and time costs, which limit the learning-based approaches’ applications in real-world scenarios.
A few unsupervised learning-based approaches have been proposed to learn image denoising without ground truth. However, existing unsupervised denoising meth-ods either show poor performance or work under imprac-tical settings. One research direction focuses on unsu-pervised learning of denoising from single noisy images
[5, 14, 16, 28, 31]. Although such training data are conve-nient to collect, learning from single noisy images shows relatively poor performance since the task is highly ill-posed. Another research direction focuses on learning from paired noisy images [18]. It utilizes two perfectly aligned images of the same scene as the training pairs. Such a method significantly improves the denoising performance and can sometimes even outperform supervised learning-based methods. However, multiple perfectly aligned noisy images of the same scene are sometimes challenging to cap-ture in practice, especially for moving scenes. One recent approach applies noise models to add synthetic noise on the already noisy images to create noisier-noisy image pairs for training a denoising network to partially capture the noise prior [23]. However, such synthetic noisier-noisy training pairs’ distributions cannot well fit that of the actual noisy-clean image pairs (we call such train-inference distribution mismatch the data bias between the two datasets), which limits the method’s denoising performance on actual noisy images. There are also methods [26,32] that train a separate network for denoising each image separately and show bet-ter results. However, such methods inevitably have higher computational costs.
In this paper, we propose an unsupervised denoising method that adopts a practical setting for preparing training data and achieves state-of-the-art performances. It only re-quires single noisy images and a noise model for training a denoising neural network. Note that the noise model is con-venient to obtain in actual raw image denoising (e.g., noise profile in DNG files [15]), and can be both point-wise and correlated types (e.g., raw image noise, stripe noise, multi-plicative noise).
To start with, we add noise from the known noise model to actual noisy images to create noisier-noisy dataset, which treats the created noisier images as inputs and actual noisy images as learning targets. Then, we conduct a study on learning denoising from such noisier-noisy datasets to em-pirically validate two findings: (1) the denoising model trained on the noisier-noisy dataset has the generalization capability of denoising actual noisy images; (2) reducing the mismatch (data bias) between the created noisier-noisy dataset and the ideal noisy-clean dataset results in a better denoising model to process the actual noisy images.
The two findings inspire us to propose the iterative data refinement (IDR) scheme, which iteratively reduces the data bias between the created noisier-noisy dataset and the ideal noisy-clean dataset to train better denoising models. In par-ticular, we first train a denoising model based on the noisier-noisy dataset. According to our finding 1, the network trained on the noisier-noisy dataset can be generalized to denoise the actual noisy images. The denoised images to-gether with the noise model can then be used to create a new intermediate dataset for a new round of training, which regards the denoised images from the previous round as the targets. As the data bias between the noisier-noisy and the ideal noisy-clean dataset is reduced (based on our finding 2), we can train a better denoising model on the newly con-structed intermediate dataset in the next round. This newly trained model can denoise the original noisy images again, based on which, better learning targets can be created for the next round. This process can be performed iteratively to gradually train better denoising models. To alleviate the heavy training time cost of this iterative method, we further propose a fast version of our IDR by reducing the training epochs in each data refinement iteration.
To evaluate the denoising models’ performances in real-world raw-image denoising, we collect a low-light dataset
SenseNoise-500, which contains 500 diverse scenes with perfectly aligned and high-quality ground truth. Our method outperforms existing unsupervised methods on both real-world and synthetic noise denoising tasks with a wide range of noise types and noise levels. Other than pointwise noises, we also show our algorithm’s denoising capability on typical correlated noises. All results demonstrate the ef-fectiveness and superiority of our proposed method.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• A self-supervised image denoising scheme, iterative data refinement (IDR), is proposed. It works under a more practical setting that only requires single noisy images and a noise model.
• We also propose a fast approximation of our full method IDR, which costs the same training time as training an ordinary denoising model while maintain-ing the similar performance as our full-version model.
• We collect a high-quality raw image denoising dataset for training denoising models and test their perfor-mance in real-world scenarios. It contains 500 diverse scenes, with images being well-aligned and the clean images are created with > 60s exposure.
• Our method outperforms existing unsupervised meth-ods on a wide range of noise types and noise levels.
In some cases, it even shows comparable performance with fully supervised methods. 2.