Abstract
Conventional steganography approaches embed a secret message into a carrier for concealed communication but are prone to attack by recent advanced steganalysis tools.
In this paper, we propose Image DisEntanglement Autoen-coder for Steganography (IDEAS) as a novel steganography without embedding (SWE) technique.
Instead of directly embedding the secret message into a carrier image, our ap-proach hides it by transforming it into a synthesised image, and is thus fundamentally immune to typical steganalysis at-tacks. By disentangling an image into two representations for structure and texture, we exploit the stability of structure representation to improve secret message extraction while increasing synthesis diversity via randomising texture rep-resentations to enhance steganography security.
In addi-tion, we design an adaptive mapping mechanism to further enhance the diversity of synthesised images when ensur-ing different required extraction levels. Experimental re-sults convincingly demonstrate IDEAS to achieve superior performance in terms of enhanced security, reliable secret message extraction and ﬂexible adaptation for different ex-traction levels, compared to state-of-the-art SWE methods. 1.

Introduction
Steganography allows to conceal a secret message into a carrier medium such as an image to secure its transmission without being noticed [10, 11, 25]. Traditional steganogra-phy methods embed a secret message into the least signiﬁ-cant bits (LSBs) [29] or texture-rich regions [7] of a carrier image to aim for undetectability of the message. To fur-ther increase payload capacity, recent deep learning-based steganography methods have been proposed to achieve both acceptable imperceptibility and small extraction errors of secret messages [1,2,19]. However, since all these methods
*Corresponding author. modify the carrier image, there is an inherent risk of the car-ried message being compromised through the application of machine learning-based steganalysis tools.
Steganography without embedding (SWE) is an emerg-ing concept to hide a secret message without directly em-bedding it into a carrier, and thus has the unique advan-tage that it is immune to typical steganalysis attacks [39].
There are two types of SWE techniques. A mapping mech-anism can be designed to transform the secret message into a sequence of image hashes selected from an existing im-age set [18, 38, 41]. The key weakness here is that the payload capacity is very small. Alternatively, deep syn-thesis methods, such as generative adversarial networks (GANs) [9, 30, 36], can be trained to generate a synthesised image by passing the secret message into a deep generator network.
Despite promising results achieved by synthesis-based
SWE methods [16], there are three drawbacks that hin-der their further use in real-world applications: (1) synthe-sised images from GANs are not sufﬁciently realistic, com-promising the imperceptibility requirement; (2) the trained generator has limited synthesis diversity, thus raising poten-tial security issues; and, more importantly, (3) it is difﬁcult to ensure a small message extraction error when training an invertible neural network to extract the hidden message.
In this paper, we propose Image DisEntanglement Au-toencoder for Steganography (IDEAS) to tackle the above issues of current synthesis-based SWE approaches. Specif-ically, we train an adversarial autoencoder which includes an encoder to disentangle images into structure and texture representations and a decoder to take these two representa-tions to synthesise realistic images. Our approach can guar-antee high quality image synthesis to enhance imperception of the hidden data. Furthermore, we explore the advan-tages that disentanglement brings, namely that the stability of structure representation improves secret message extrac-tion accuracy while randomised texture vectors increase the style diversity of the synthesised images to enhance secu-rity. In addition, for scenarios where a particular acceptable extraction level is required, we design an adaptive mapping strategy to achieve enhanced hidden capacity and synthesis diversity to improve steganography performance.
Our main contribution in this paper is that we present a novel disentanglement SWE algorithm to achieve state-of-the-art steganographic performance in terms of enhanced security, reliable secret message extraction and ﬂexible adaptation for different extraction levels. In particular, we highlight which aspects of our approach correspond to this improved performance:
• Enhanced security: our proposed disentanglement
SWE method ensures high-quality image synthesis as well as increases style diversity to minimise the risk of compromise;
• Reliable message extraction: we use the structural stability of synthesised images to improve message ex-traction accuracy. It is worth noting that in some pur-posely designed settings we can achieve lossless mes-sage extraction;
• Flexible adaptation to different extraction levels: we design an adaptive mapping mechanism to repre-sent ﬂexible message-to-noise mapping. Through the use of different mapping functions, we achieve ﬂexible hidden capacity and synthesis diversity corresponding to several secret message extraction levels which can be adapted to scenarios with speciﬁc requirements.
The code for IDEAS is made available at https:// github.com/Lemok00/IDEAS. 2.