Abstract
Precise representations of 3D faces are beneﬁcial to var-ious computer vision and graphics applications. Due to the data discretization and model linearity, however, it re-mains challenging to capture accurate identity and expres-sion clues in current studies. This paper presents a novel 3D morphable face model, namely ImFace, to learn a nonlinear and continuous space with implicit neural representations.
It builds two explicitly disentangled deformation ﬁelds to model complex shapes associated with identities and ex-pressions, respectively, and designs an improved learning strategy to extend embeddings of expressions to allow more diverse changes. We further introduce a Neural Blend-Field to learn sophisticated details by adaptively blending a se-ries of local ﬁelds. In addition to ImFace, an effective pre-processing pipeline is proposed to address the issue of wa-tertight input requirement in implicit representations, en-abling them to work with common facial surfaces for the
ﬁrst time. Extensive experiments are performed to demon-strate the superiority of ImFace. 1.

Introduction 3D Morphable Face Models (3DMMs) are well-reputed statistical models, established by learning techniques upon prior distributions of facial shapes and textures from a set of samples with dense correspondence, aiming at render-ing realistic faces of a high variety. Since a morphable representation is unique across different downstream tasks where the geometry and appearance are separately control-lable, 3DMMs are pervasively exploited in many face anal-ysis applications in the ﬁeld of computer vision, computer graphics, biometrics, and medical imaging [2, 8, 27, 50].
In 3DMMs, the most fundamental issue lies in the way to generate latent morphable representations, and during the
*Corresponding author.
Figure 1. ImFace encodes complex face variations by two explic-itly disentangled deformation ﬁelds with respect to a template face, resulting in a morphable implicit representation for 3D faces. past two decades, along with data improvement in scale, di-versity and quality [10, 13, 31, 58], remarkable progresses have been achieved. The methods are initially linear model based [7, 39, 40] and further extended to multilinear model based [9, 12, 55], where different modes are individually encoded. Unfortunately, for the relatively limited repre-sentation ability of linear models, these methods are not so competent at handling the cases with complicated vari-ations, e.g. exaggerated expressions.
In the context of deep learning, a number of nonlinear models have been investigated with the input of 2D images [53, 54] or 3D meshes [5, 11, 15, 17, 46] by using Convolutional Neural
Networks or Graph Neural Networks. They indeed deliver performance gains; however, restricted by the resolution of discrete representing strategies on input data, facial priors are not sufﬁciently captured, incurring loss of shape details.
Besides, all current methods are dependent on the preposed procedure of point-to-point correspondence [1,6,25,34], but face registration itself remains challenging.
Recently, several studies on Implicit Neural Representa-tions (INRs) [16, 26, 32, 35, 38] have shown that 3D geome-tries can be precisely modeled by learning continuous deep implicit functions. They describe an input observation as a low-dimensional shape embedding and estimate the Signed
Distance Function (SDF) or the occupancy value of a query point so that the surface of an arbitrary resolution and topol-ogy can be deﬁned by an isocontour. Due to the continuous parameterization and consistent representation, INRs prove superior to the discrete voxels, pointclouds and meshes, and report decent results in shape reconstruction [24, 56, 57, 61] and surface registration [21,33,62]. Such an advantage sug-gests an alternative to 3DMM that can fulﬁll accurate corre-spondence and ﬁne-grained modeling in a uniﬁed network.
Nevertheless, unlike the objects with apparent shape differ-ences and limited non-rigid variations such as indoor scenes and human bodies, all facial surfaces look very similar but include more complex deformations, where multiple identi-ties and rich expressions deeply interweave with each other, making current INR methods problematic in face modeling, as evidenced by the preliminary attempt [59]. Another dif-ﬁculty is that implicit functions primarily require watertight input, which is not friendly to facial surfaces.
This paper proposes a novel 3D face morphable model, namely ImFace, which substantially upgrades conventional 3DMMs by learning INRs. To capture nonlinear facial ge-ometry changes, ImFace builds separate INR sub-networks to explicitly disentangle shape morphs into two deforma-tion ﬁelds for identity and expression respectively (as Fig. 1 shows), and an improved embedding learning strategy is in-troduced to extend the latent space of expressions to allow more diverse details.
In this way, inter-individual differ-ences and ﬁne-grained deformations can be accurately mod-eled, which simultaneously takes into account the ﬂexibility when applied to related tasks. Furthermore, inspired by lin-ear blend skinning [30], a Neural Blend-Field is presented to decompose the entire facial deformation or geometry into semantically meaningful regions encoded by a set of lo-cal implicit functions and adaptively blend them through a lightweight module, leading to more sophisticated repre-sentations with reduced parameters. Besides, a new pre-processing pipeline is designed, which bypasses the need of watertight face data as in existing SDF-based INR mod-els and works well for various facial surfaces, i.e., either hardware-acquired or artiﬁcially synthesized.
In summary, the main contributions of this study include:
• We propose a novel INR-based 3DMM, which encodes complex face shape variations by two explicitly dis-entangled deformation ﬁelds, learning powerful repre-sentations in a ﬁne-grained and semantically meaning-ful manner.
• We present an effective preprocessing pipeline, which deﬁnes a general SDF for non-watertight 3D faces, en-abling INRs to work with them for the ﬁrst time.
• We experimentally demonstrate that ImFace has the advantage in synthesizing high-quality 3D faces with plausible details, outperforming the state-of-the-art counterparts in 3D face reconstruction. 2.