Abstract
Full-reference (FR) image quality assessment (IQA) evaluates the visual quality of a distorted image by mea-suring its perceptual difference with pristine-quality refer-ence, and has been widely used in low-level vision tasks.
Pairwise labeled data with mean opinion score (MOS) are required in training FR-IQA model, but is time-consuming and cumbersome to collect. In contrast, unlabeled data can be easily collected from an image degradation or restora-tion process, making it encouraging to exploit unlabeled training data to boost FR-IQA performance. Moreover, due to the distribution inconsistency between labeled and unla-beled data, outliers may occur in unlabeled data, further in-creasing the training difficulty. In this paper, we suggest to incorporate semi-supervised and positive-unlabeled (PU) learning for exploiting unlabeled data while mitigating the adverse effect of outliers. Particularly, by treating all la-beled data as positive samples, PU learning is leveraged to identify negative samples (i.e., outliers) from unlabeled data. Semi-supervised learning (SSL) is further deployed to exploit positive unlabeled data by dynamically generat-ing pseudo-MOS. We adopt a dual-branch network includ-ing reference and distortion branches. Furthermore, spatial attention is introduced in the reference branch to concen-trate more on the informative regions, and sliced Wasser-stein distance is used for robust difference map computation to address the misalignment issues caused by images recov-ered by GAN models. Extensive experiments show that our method performs favorably against state-of-the-arts on the benchmark datasets PIPAL, KADID-10k, TID2013, LIVE and CSIQ. The source code and model are available at https://github.com/happycaoyue/JSPL. 1.

Introduction
The goal of image quality assessment is to provide com-putational models that can automatically predict the percep-Positive
Labeled Data
Positive
Unlabeled Data
IQA Model
Prediction Score e v i t i s o
P e v i t a g e
N
Semi-supervised Learning
Positive-unlabeled Learning
Binary
Classifier
Unlabeled Data
Positive
Labeled Data
Unlabeled Data
Inference
Training
Illustration of joint semi-supervised and PU learning
Figure 1. (JSPL) method, which mitigates the adverse effect of outliers in unlabeled data for boosting the performance of IQA model. tual image quality consistent with human subjective percep-tion. Over the past few decades, significant progress has been made in developing full reference (FR) image quality assessment (IQA) metrics, including peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) and structural similarity index (SSIM) [58], which have been widely used in various image processing fields. Recently, CNN-based FR-IQA models have attracted more attention, which usually learn a mapping from dis-torted and pristine images to mean opinion score.
Most existing CNN-based FR-IQA models are trained using pairwise labeled data with mean opinion score (MOS), thus requiring extensive human judgements. To re-duce the cost of collecting a large amount of labeled data, a potential alternative is semi-supervised learning for exploit-ing unlabeled samples which are almost free. Recently, con-siderable attention has been given to semi-supervised IQA algorithms [38,39,55,59,63] which show promising perfor-mance using both labeled and unlabeled data. However, un-labeled data can be collected in various unconstrained ways and may have a much different distribution from labeled
data. Consequently, outliers usually are inevitable and are harmful to semi-supervised learning [22].
In this paper, we incorporate semi-supervised and positive-unlabeled (PU) learning for exploiting unlabeled data while mitigating the adverse effect of outliers. PU learning aims at learning a binary classifier from a labeled set of positive samples as well as an unlabeled set of both positive and negative samples, and has been widely applied in image classification [8] and anomaly detection [68]. As for our task, the labeled images with MOS annotations can be naturally treated as positive samples. As shown in Fig. 1,
PU learning is then exploited to find and exclude outliers, i.e., negative samples, from the unlabeled set of images without MOS annotations. Then, semi-supervised learning (SSL) is deployed to leverage both labeled set and positive unlabeled images for training deep FR-IQA models. More-over, the prediction by PU learning can also serve as the role of confidence estimation to gradually select valuable positive unlabeled images for SSL. Thus, our joint semi-supervised and PU learning (JSPL) method provides an ef-fective and convenient way to incorporate both labeled and unlabeled sets for boosting FR-IQA performance.
Besides, we also present a new FR-IQA network for em-phasizing informative regions and suppressing the effect of misalignment between distorted and pristine images. Like most existing methods, our FR-IQA network involves a
Siamese (i.e., dual-branch) feature extraction structure re-spectively for distorted and pristine images. The pristine and distortion features are then fed into the distance cal-culation module to generate the difference map, which is propagated to the score prediction network to obtain the prediction score. However, for GAN-based image restora-tion, the distorted image is usually spatially misaligned with the pristine image, making pixel-wise Euclidean distance unsuitable for characterizing the perceptual quality of dis-torted image [18,19]. To mitigate this, Gu [18] introduced a pixel-wise warping operation, i.e., space warping difference (SWD). In this work, we extend sliced Wasserstein distance to its local version (LocalSW) for making the difference map robust to small misalignment while maintaining its lo-cality. Moreover, human visual system (HVS) usually pays more visual attention to the image regions containing more informative content [33, 44, 51, 60], and significant perfor-mance improvements have been achieved by considering the correlation with human visual fixation or visual region-of-interest detection [14, 32, 34]. Taking the properties of
HVS into account, we leverage spatial attention modules on pristine feature for emphasizing more on informative re-gions, which are then used for reweighting distance map to generate the calibrated difference maps.
Extensive experiments are conducted to evaluate our
JSPL method for FR-IQA. Based on the labeled training set, we collect unlabeled data by using several representative image degradation or restoration models. On the Percep-tual Image Processing ALgorithms (PIPAL) dataset [19], the results show that both JSPL, LocalSW, and spatial atten-tion contribute to performance gain of our method, which performs favorably against state-of-the-arts for assessing perceptual quality of GAN-based image restoration results.
We further conduct experiments on four traditional IQA datasets, i.e., LIVE [47], CSIQ [33], TID2013 [45] and
KADID-10k [35], further showing the superiority of our
JSPL method against state-of-the-arts.
To sum up, the main contribution of this work includes:
• A joint semi-supervised and PU learning (JSPL) method is presented to exploit images with and without
MOS annotations for improving FR-IQA performance.
In comparison to SSL, PU learning plays a crucial role in our JSPL by excluding outliers and gradually select-ing positive unlabeled data for SSL.
• In FR-IQA network, spatial attention and local sliced
Wasserstein distance are further deployed in comput-ing difference map for emphasizing informative re-gions and suppressing the effect of misalignment be-tween distorted and pristine image.
• Extensive experiments on five benchmark IQA datasets show that our JSPL model performs favorably against the state-of-the-art FR-IQA models. 2.