Abstract 1.

Introduction
We propose a novel style transfer method to quickly cre-ate a new visual product with a nice appearance for indus-trial designers reference. Given a source product, a tar-get product, and an art style image, our method produces a neural warping ﬁeld that warps the source shape to im-itate the geometric style of the target and a neural texture transformation network that transfers the artistic style to the warped source product. Our model, Industrial Style
Transfer (InST), consists of large-scale geometric warping (LGW) and interest-consistency texture transfer (ICTT). L-GW aims to explore an unsupervised transformation be-tween the shape masks of the source and target products for ﬁtting large-scale shape warping. Furthermore, we in-troduce a mask smoothness regularization term to preven-t the abrupt changes of the details of the source product.
ICTT introduces an interest regularization term to main-tain important contents of the warped product when it is stylized by using the art style image. Extensive experimen-tal results demonstrate that InST achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple visual product design tasks, e.g., companies’ snail logos and classical bottles (please see
Fig. 1). To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to extend the neural style transfer method to create indus-trial product appearances. Code is available at https:
//jcyang98.github.io/InST/home.html
Visual Product Design (VPD) has been recognized as a central role in the industrial product design ﬁeld as con-sumers’ choices heavily depend on the visual appearance of a new product in the marketplace [12]. VPD often designs a novel product [11] by following different appearance roles (e.g., aesthetic, functional, and symbolic). For example, de-signers usually produce the beautiful appearance of ﬂying cars by referring to airplanes and cars to fuse their ﬂying and driving functions and attractive aesthetic. However, it is difﬁcult to quickly create high-quality product appearances due to the human intelligence in the VPD process, which is heavily dependent on designers’ creative ability. Fortu-nately, neural style transfer (NST) [16, 21, 28, 38], aiming at transferring artistic and geometric styles of one or two reference images to a content image, has a strong opportu-nity to assist the designers because the art style transforma-tion is suitable for the aesthetic value, and some geometric shape transformations can gain the functional and symbolic values, such as Beijing National Stadium (bird’s nest and building). Therefore, we seek for a style transfer formula-tion to automatically generate many visual appearance can-didates of new products for industrial designers’ reference.
However, most modern NST methods [14,25,32,59,60], including geometric NST [28, 38], are difﬁcultly or impos-sibly extended into directly design visual product appear-ances due to the following two challenges. One is the large-Figure 2. The pipeline of our industrial style transfer. Our method creates a new product N by warping source S to target T , and generates a ﬁnal product appearance O by transferring the artistic style of reference image A to the new product N . scale geometric shape between diverse objects (or product-s) since designing new products is often to fuse two object-s with very different geometries, such as ﬂying cars (air-planes and cars) and butterﬂy doors (butterﬂy’s wings and car doors). Another is that NST usually makes the content worse in the stylization process, e.g., AdaIN [21], and WC-T [33], resulting in that product designers cannot refer to both rich content and novel geometry for generating cre-ative inspirations.
To address these challenges, we develop an industrial style transfer (InST) method to create new product appear-ances, shown in Fig. 2. Given a source product (or object), a target product, and an art reference image, InST aims to transfer both the industrially geometric shape of the target product and the art style of the reference image to the source product. In contrast to the existing NST methods, InST con-sists of large-scale geometric warping (LGW) and interest-consistency texture transfer (ICTT). Unlike small-scale ge-ometric NST [28, 38], LGW designs a neural warping ﬁeld between the shape masks of the source and target product-s using a shape-consistency loss. This is different from a warping ﬁeld between their textural pixels as it results in a worse optimization, that is, a failure deformation. In addi-tion, we explore a mask smoothness regularization term to prevent the abrupt changes of the details of the source prod-uct. With the help of the masks, LGW works well in large-scale warping between two products even though they are semantically irrelevant.
ICTT aims to keep interesting contents of the new prod-uct when it is stylized by using the art reference image. In-spired by the SuperPoint network [15], we present an in-terest regularization (IR) term based on both interest points and descriptors to constrain the art stylization to minimize perceptual differences between the new product and its styl-ized product. Unlike the most relevant work, ArtFlow [3], we design the interesting perceptual constraint to prevent worse contents, and our IR can further improve the perfor-mance of ArtFlow. Overall, the contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
• For large-scale geometric differences in the visual product design process, we explore a large-scale ge-ometric warping module based on mask to transfer ge-ometric shape style from one object product to another, even though irrelevant semantics.
• For product content maintenance in the stylization process, we introduce an interest-consistency texture transfer with interesting regularization using interest point and descriptor extracted by the SuperPoint net-work to preserve content details.
• Combining LGW with ICTT, we propose an industrial style transfer framework to fast generate visual appear-ances of new products, e.g., companies’ logos, ﬂying cars, and porcelain fashions. To the best of our knowl-edge, this work could open up a new ﬁeld of style transfer, designing industrial product appearances. 2.