Abstract
Thermal infrared imaging is widely used in body tem-perature measurement, security monitoring, and so on, but its safety research attracted attention only in recent years.
We proposed the infrared adversarial clothing, which could fool infrared pedestrian detectors at different angles. We simulated the process from cloth to clothing in the digital world and then designed the adversarial “QR code” pat-tern. The core of our method is to design a basic pattern that can be expanded periodically, and make the pattern after random cropping and deformation still have an adversarial effect, then we can process the flat cloth with an adversarial pattern into any 3D clothes. The results showed that the op-timized “QR code” pattern lowered the Average Precision (AP) of YOLOv3 by 87.7%, while the random “QR code” pattern and blank pattern lowered the AP of YOLOv3 by 57.9% and 30.1%, respectively, in the digital world. We then manufactured an adversarial shirt with a new mate-rial: aerogel. Physical-world experiments showed that the adversarial “QR code” pattern clothing lowered the AP of
YOLOv3 by 64.6%, while the random “QR code” pattern clothing and fully heat-insulated clothing lowered the AP of YOLOv3 by 28.3% and 22.8%, respectively. We used the model ensemble technique to improve the attack transfer-ability to unseen models. 1.

Introduction
Thermal infrared (“infrared” for short throughout the pa-per) imaging is widely used in many areas such as hu-man temperature measurement, safety monitoring, and au-*Corresponding author.
Figure 1. Demonstration of physical infrared attack. A person wearing the adversarial clothes hid from infrared detectors at mul-tiple angles. Whereas, the other person wearing ordinary clothes was detected (indicated by bounding boxes).
Infrared imaging has its unique advantages [42]. topilot.
First of all, infrared imaging can image in the dark, which means that the infrared equipment can work 24 hours a day.
Secondly, unlike radar imaging, infrared imaging does not need to transmit signals actively, which saves more energy.
Third, infrared imaging can measure temperature informa-tion, which is unavailable in visible light or radar filed. Dur-ing the COVID-19 pandemic, infrared imaging is widely used for fast body temperature monitoring.
Infrared object detection combines deep learning with infrared imaging technique. The security of deep learn-ing has attracted more and more attention in recent years.
Szegedy et al. [33] found that neural networks can out-put error results with high confidence by adding specially crafted perturbations to the input data. The perturbed data is
called adversarial example. Adversarial examples threaten not only the digital world [4, 13, 21, 22, 33, 38] but also the physical world [1, 10, 32, 34, 39]. Nowadays, most research on adversarial examples focuses on the visible light field; some are in the radar and infrared field. This paper focuses on the security of thermal infrared object detection systems.
Traditional infrared stealth generally uses two methods: heat insulation and active cooling, but they usually cannot completely hide thermal infrared signals. For example, as people need to breathe, the human body always emits ther-mal infrared signals to the outside. Adversarial example technology provides a different way of stealth, which can make deep learning-based detectors unable to detect peo-ple through carefully designed patterns [18, 34, 39]. Visible light patterns can be easily displayed in the physical world through printing or LED displays, but infrared patterns are difficult to be “printed”.
Zhu et al. [42] proposed a physical method using small bulbs to attack infrared pedestrian detectors. To the best of our knowledge, that was the first work to realize physical at-tacks on the thermal infrared pedestrian detectors. But that method has an obvious shortcoming. The small bulb board can only attack at a specific angle (usually the front) of the human body. In this work, our goal is to solve this problem by designing a new physical attack method. Specifically, we want to design a piece of clothing to achieve a “wear-able” attack. There are two requirements for the adversarial clothing. First, the designed clothes should have a specific texture and deceive infrared pedestrian detectors from dif-ferent angles. Second, the adversarial pattern on the cloth-ing should still remain effective after non-rigid deformation.
Towards this goal, we designed infrared adversarial clothes based on a new material: aerogel. The core of our method is to design a basic pattern that can be expanded pe-riodically, and make the pattern after random cropping and deformation still have an adversarial effect, so that we can process the flat cloth with adversarial pattern into any 3D clothes. Figure 1 shows an example of physical infrared clothing attack and control experiments. The contributions of this paper are as follows:
• First, we simulated the process from cloth to clothing in the digital world and then designed the adversarial
“QR code” pattern.
• Second, we manufactured infrared adversarial cloth-ing based on a new material aerogel, which hid from infrared detectors at multiple angles in the physical world. 2.