Abstract
We introduce the integrative task of few-shot classifica-tion and segmentation (FS-CS) that aims to both classify and segment target objects in a query image when the tar-get classes are given with a few examples. This task com-bines two conventional few-shot learning problems, few-shot classification and segmentation. FS-CS generalizes them to more realistic episodes with arbitrary image pairs, where each target class may or may not be present in the query. To address the task, we propose the integrative few-shot learning (iFSL) framework for FS-CS, which trains a learner to construct class-wise foreground maps for multi-label classification and pixel-wise segmentation. We also develop an effective iFSL model, attentive squeeze net-work (ASNet), that leverages deep semantic correlation and global self-attention to produce reliable foreground maps.
In experiments, the proposed method shows promising per-formance on the FS-CS task and also achieves the state of the art on standard few-shot segmentation benchmarks. 1.

Introduction
Few-shot learning [15,16,30,82,84] is the learning prob-lem where a learner experiences only a limited number of examples as supervision.
In computer vision, it has been most actively studied for the tasks of image classifi-cation [22, 29, 66] and semantic segmentation [6, 41, 48, 59] among many others [21, 49, 54, 94, 99]. Few-shot classifica-tion (FS-C) aims to classify a query image into target classes when a few support examples are given for each target class.
Few-shot segmentation (FS-S) is to segment out the target class regions on the query image in a similar setup. While being closely related to each other [33, 92, 100], these two few-shot learning problems have so far been treated indi-vidually. Furthermore, the conventional setups for the few-shot problems, FS-C and FS-S, are limited and do not re-flect realistic scenarios; FS-C [28, 55, 76] presumes that the query always contains one of the target classes in classifica-tion, while FS-S [25,52,63] allows the presence of multiple
Figure 1. Top: Integrative few-shot learning framework (iFSL) for integrative few-shot classification and segmentation (FS-CS).
Bottom: FS-S learners are trained to segment a query image using a semantically-coupled support set thus often blindly highlight any salient objects regardless of support semantics. The proposed FS-CS learners are trained to predict class presence as well as corre-sponding masks thus correctly discriminate what to segment based on the semantic relevance between the query and the support. classes but does not handle the absence of the target classes in segmentation. These respective limitations prevent few-shot learning from generalizing to and evaluating on more realistic cases in the wild. For example, when a query image without any target class is given as in Fig. 1, FS-S learners typically segment out arbitrary salient objects in the query.
To address the aforementioned issues, we introduce the integrative task of few-shot classification and segmentation (FS-CS) that combines the two few-shot learning problems into a multi-label and background-aware prediction prob-lem. Given a query image and a few-shot support set for target classes, FS-CS aims to identify the presence of each target class and predict its foreground mask from the query.
Unlike FS-C and FS-S, it does not presume either the class exclusiveness in classification or the presence of all the tar-get classes in segmentation.
As a learning framework for FS-CS, we propose inte-grative few-shot learning (iFSL) that learns to construct shared foreground maps for both classification and segmen-tation. It naturally combines multi-label classification and pixel-wise segmentation by sharing class-wise foreground maps and also allows to learn with class tags or segmen-tation annotations. For effective iFSL, we design the at-tentive squeeze network (ASNet) that computes semantic correlation tensors between the query and the support im-age features and then transforms the tensor into a fore-ground map by strided self-attention. It generates reliable foreground maps for iFSL by leveraging multi-layer neural features [44, 45] and global self-attention [11, 75]. In ex-periments, we demonstrate the efficacy of the iFSL frame-work on FS-CS and compare ASNet with recent meth-ods [44, 86–88]. Our method significantly improves over the other methods on FS-CS in terms of classification and segmentation accuracy and also outperforms the recent FS-S methods on the conventional FS-S. We also cross-validate the task transferability between the FS-C, FS-S, and FS-CS learners, and show the FS-CS learners effectively generalize when transferred to the FS-C and FS-S tasks.
Our contribution is summarized as follows:
• We introduce the task of integrative few-shot classi-fication and segmentation (FS-CS), which combines few-shot classification and few-shot segmentation into an integrative task by addressing their limitations.
• We propose the integrative few-shot learning frame-work (iFSL), which learns to both classify and segment a query image using class-wise foreground maps.
• We design the attentive squeeze network (ASNet), which squeezes semantic correlations into a fore-ground map for iFSL via strided global self-attention.
• We show in extensive experiments that the framework, iFSL, and the architecture, ASNet, are both effective, achieving a significant gain on FS-S as well as FS-CS. 2.