Abstract
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection plays a core role in activity understanding. Though recent two/one-stage methods have achieved impressive results, as an es-sential step, discovering interactive human-object pairs re-mains challenging. Both one/two-stage methods fail to ef-fectively extract interactive pairs instead of generating re-dundant negative pairs. In this work, we introduce a pre-viously overlooked interactiveness bimodal prior: given an object in an image, after pairing it with the humans, the generated pairs are either mostly non-interactive, or mostly interactive, with the former more frequent than the latter. Based on this interactiveness bimodal prior we pro-pose the “interactiveness field”. To make the learned field compatible with real HOI image considerations, we pro-pose new energy constraints based on the cardinality and difference in the inherent “interactiveness field” underly-ing interactive versus non-interactive pairs. Consequently, our method can detect more precise pairs and thus signifi-cantly boost HOI detection performance, which is validated on widely-used benchmarks where we achieve decent im-provements over state-of-the-arts. Our code is available at https://github.com/Foruck/Interactiveness-Field. 1.

Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection consists of distinguishing human-object (H-O) pairs that have interac-tions from still images and classifying the interactions into various verbs. In practice, an HOI instance is represented as a triplet: ⟨human, verb, object⟩. Considering its important role in recent advances in robot manipulation [14], surveil-lance event detection [1, 30], and so on, HOI detection has been attracting continuous attention in computer vision.
Overall, HOI detection can be divided into H/O local-ization, interactive H-O pairing, i.e., localizing the inter-active humans and objects and pairing them correctly, and
*The research is supported in part by the Hong Kong Research Grant
Council under grant number 16201420.
†The first two authors contribute equally.
‡Corresponding author.
Figure 1. Distribution of interactive ratio between interactive and non-interactive H-O pairs in HICO-DET [4], where two represen-tative samples are shown. For the pairs containing a given ob-ject (yellow), either non-interactive pairs or interactive pairs dom-inates, with the former much more frequent. verb classification. The most conventional approach is the two-stage paradigm [10, 13, 22, 26, 37] proposed in HO-RCNN [5], where an object detector is first adopted to detect all the human/object instances in a given image, followed by exhaustive pairing and verb classification. The major issue of this straightforward approach is that, in practice, only a small portion of human/object instances are involved in
HOI relationships, making the exhaustive object detection and pairing excessive and seemingly unnecessary.
The other approach consists of one-stage methods [18, 35] represented by PPDM [27]. One-stage approach adopts an end-to-end manner following the one-stage object detec-tion [21, 44], where the object boxes are replaced by H-O pair boxes and the object category by HOI category. This circumvents the exhaustive instance detection and explicit pairing while achieving the same goal. However, given that a typical image, e.g., HICO-DET [4] contains 2.47 HOIs on average, it is still unsatisfactory that a recent state-of-the-art one-stage method QPIC [35] still needs 100 output pairs per image to achieve a recall of 70%.
Though significant progress has been made, the two
paradigms are still bottle-necked by H-O pairing: they fail to effectively extract interactive pairs but generate exces-sively redundant and negative pairs. One of the early studies to address this problem is TIN [23, 26], where the pairing problem is addressed by interactiveness learning. A pair-wise interactiveness binary classifier is inserted to discrim-inate whether a human and an object should be paired (i.e., interactive or otherwise). Despite its simple design, the im-provement is rather decent, indicating the great potential of such proper pairing strategies.
Given this early promise, here, we aim at improving HOI detection by studying the interactiveness problem from a global and distribution point of view. Specifically, we pro-the bi-pose a previously overlooked but powerful prior: modal property of interactiveness. In Figure 1, the domi-nating proportion of H-O pairs given the same object in an image are either interactive or non-interactive, while most of the time they are non-interactive. This phenomenon of interactiveness distribution is closely related to Zipf’s
Law [2]: informative events are rarer than non-informative events. To exploit this prior, we pursue a verb-agnostic mea-surement of interactiveness. In line with the notion of field and its global measurement [8] as such, we introduce the
“interactiveness field” to model the global interactiveness distribution of HOI images. Specifically, we encode the H-O pairs in a complex scene as a field. Each pair is encoded as a point with an “energy” value, indicating its difference from other pairs. The field is expected to obey the bimodal prior, i.e., the high-energy pairs should be rare. Based on this, we analyze the change of the field with the modifica-tion on a single pair and impose energy constraints on the field modeling: modification on high-energy pairs should bring more salient influence. Then, the interactiveness la-bels are bounded with the modeled field following the prior.
To use the interactiveness field, we propose a novel paradigm. First, instead of exhaustive human/object detec-tion, a DETR [3] structure detector is adopted to directly detect initial H-O pairs organized in an object-centric man-ner. Subsequently, based on the interactiveness field sub-jecting to the bimodal prior, we design an interactiveness field module to further filter out non-interactive pairs. Fi-nally, the filtered pairs are fed into a verb classifier for HOI classification. On HICO-DET [4] and V-COCO [12], we achieve state-of-the-art and significant improvements.
Our contribution includes: 1) the interactiveness bimodal prior of HOI is identified as a key to improve the H-O pair filtering and boost the HOI detection, based on which an in-teractiveness field model is introduced; 2) we achieve state-of-the-art performance on widely-used HOI benchmarks. 2.