Abstract
Infrared small target detection (IRSTD) refers to extract-ing small and dim targets from blurred backgrounds, which has a wide range of applications such as traffic manage-ment and marine rescue. Due to the low signal-to-noise ra-tio and low contrast, infrared targets are easily submerged in the background of heavy noise and clutter. How to de-tect the precise shape information of infrared targets re-mains challenging. In this paper, we propose a novel in-frared shape network (ISNet), where Taylor finite differ-ence (TFD)-inspired edge block and two-orientation atten-tion aggregation (TOAA) block are devised to address this problem. Specifically, TFD-inspired edge block aggregates and enhances the comprehensive edge information from dif-ferent levels, in order to improve the contrast between tar-get and background and also lay a foundation for extracting shape information with mathematical interpretation. TOAA block calculates the low-level information with attention mechanism in both row and column directions and fuses it with the high-level information to capture the shape char-acteristic of targets and suppress noises. In addition, we construct a new benchmark consisting of 1,000 realistic im-ages in various target shapes, different target sizes, and rich clutter backgrounds with accurate pixel-level annota-tions, called IRSTD-1k. Experiments on public datasets and
IRSTD-1k demonstrate the superiority of our approach over representative state-of-the-art IRSTD methods. The dataset and code are available at github.com/RuiZhang97/ISNet. 1.

Introduction
Infrared small target detection (IRSTD) has a wide range of important applications such as traffic management and marine rescue [8, 33, 37]. Misdetections in these fields may cause significant damage to multiple aspects of the real
*Corresponding author. world. Therefore, the improvement of IRSTD is one of the priorities in both academic research and industrial division.
Compared to general object detection targets, infrared small targets have the following characteristics: 1) Dim: In-frared images have lots of noises and clutter in the back-ground, and the targets are easily submerged in the back-ground, resulting in low contrast and low signal-to-clutter ratio (SCR). 2) Small: Due to the long camera to object dis-tance, infrared targets usually occupy only about one to ten pixels in the images. 3) Varying shape: The shape and size of the target varies in different scenes and situations accord-ing to different target types.
To detect infrared small targets, researchers have de-veloped several pioneering works based on image pro-cessing and machine learning techniques including filter-ing, human visual system (HVS), and low-rank represen-tation. However, these traditional methods have some limi-tations. Filtering-based methods, such as top-hat filter [2] and max-median/max-mean filter [9], can only suppress uniform background clutters but cannot suppress complex background noises, resulting in high false alarm rates and unstable performance. As for the methods based on HVS, the spectral residuals-based method [16] can not efficiently suppress the clutters in the background. Local-contrast-based methods [4, 12] are only suitable for high contrast targets instead of dim targets. Low-rank representation-based methods [5, 10, 38, 39] can adapt to low SCR in-frared images but still suffer from a high false alarm rate on images with small and varying-shape targets in complex backgrounds. In addition to the issues above, most tradi-tional methods heavily rely on hand-crafted features, which is suboptimal and ineffective in dealing with challenging cases. Besides, the design of handcraft features and tuning of hyper-parameters require expert knowledge and a lot of engineering efforts.
With the success of deep learning in many fields, it of-fers novel solutions to the above problems. Convolution neural network (CNN) can efficiently extract features from
infrared small targets owing to the data-driven and end-to-end learning paradigm. Liu et al. [19] applied multi-layer perception (MLP) and constructed a five-layer network for
IRSTD. With a conditional generative adversarial network,
Wang et al. [34] proposed MDvsFA for IRTD and achieved the balance between two metrics, i.e., miss detection v.s. false alarm. To extract contextual features from different layers, Dai et al. [6] proposed an asymmetric contextual modulation (ACM) feature fusion method (ACMNet). Al-though existing CNN-based IRSTD methods have yielded good results, they can only detect the presence of the small target in infrared images, while the contour of the detected targets is very blurred. In fact, the edge and shape informa-tion of infrared targets is not only critical for target classi-fication tasks but also extremely important for practical ap-plications such as marine rescue by providing useful clues to help recognize their types. Due to the low contrast and low SCR between infrared small target and background, it is difficult to extract useful edge and shape features of the target, especially from multiple feature levels, where deep layers may have clear semantics but lack fine details of edge and shape. How to obtain precise edge and shape of infrared small targets remains challenging and unexplored.
In this paper, we make an attempt to address this prob-lem by exploring a new idea that incorporates the recon-struction of target shape into the detection of small infrared targets. Specifically, we devise a novel infrared shape net-work (ISNet) with two key components for IRSTD. First, we devise a Taylor finite difference (TFD)-inspired edge block to aggregate the edge features by drawing inspira-tion from the neural ordinary differential equation (Neural
ODE) area, where the ODE is interpreted as a second-order
Taylor finite difference equation. Then, we devise a two-orientation attention aggregation (TOAA) block to extract cross-level features by exacting the low-level features from both row and column directions and integrating them with high-level features. After that, the cross-level features are fed to the TFD-inspired edge block to reconstruct the tar-get edges. By stacking multiple TFD-inspired edge blocks and TOAA blocks in a sequence, the long-range contextual information of the target can also be captured. Thus, the network can better locate the target and obtain the accu-rate shape of the targets. Besides, we apply a bottleneck structure to remove high-frequency noise in infrared images and enable a more informative flow through the network.
In addition, we also construct a new benchmark consisting of 1,000 realistic images in various target shapes, differ-ent target sizes, and rich clutter backgrounds with accurate pixel-level annotations, called IRSTD-1k. Experimental re-sults on the popular NUAA-SIRST dataset and IRSTD-1k demonstrate that the proposed ISNet outperforms state-of-the-art (SOTA) IRSTD methods in terms of false-alarm rate, probability detection rate, intersection over union (IoU) ra-tio, and normalized intersection over union (nIoU) ratio.
The contributions of this study can be summarized as:
• We propose a novel idea to address the challenges in
IRSTD, i.e., incorporating the reconstruction of target shape into the detection of small infrared targets.
• We devise two key components named TFD-inspired edge block and TOAA block to efficiently extract edge fea-tures and aggregate cross-level features from noisy, low contrast and SCR infrared images.
• We establish a new large benchmark called IRSTD-1k to facilitate the research in the area of IRSTD, which con-sists of 1,000 manually labeled realistic images with various target shapes, different target sizes, and rich clutter back-grounds from diverse scenes. 2.