Abstract
Physical products are often complex assemblies combin-ing a multitude of 3D parts modeled in computer-aided de-sign (CAD) software. CAD designers build up these assem-blies by aligning individual parts to one another using con-straints called joints. In this paper we introduce JoinABLe, a learning-based method that assembles parts together to form joints. JoinABLe uses the weak supervision available in standard parametric CAD files without the help of object class labels or human guidance. Our results show that by making network predictions over a graph representation of solid models we can outperform multiple baseline methods with an accuracy (79.53%) that approaches human perfor-mance (80%). Finally, to support future research we release the Fusion 360 Gallery assembly dataset, containing as-semblies with rich information on joints, contact surfaces, holes, and the underlying assembly graph structure. 1.

Introduction
The physical products that surround us every day are often complex assemblies combining a multitude of parts modeled using computer-aided design (CAD) software.
Well-designed assemblies are critical to ensure that prod-ucts are cost-efficient, reliable, and easy to physically as-semble. CAD designers build up assemblies by aligning pairs of parts together using constraints called joints. These joints determine the relative pose and allowed degrees of freedom (DOF) of parts in an assembly [43]. For example, a bolt can be constrained to a hole, then a nut constrained to the bolt, and so on until an entire assembly is designed.
Assemblies may contain thousands of parts, represented as solid models in the boundary representation (B-Rep) for-mat [33, 61], and are used for everything from furniture, to vehicles, to electronic devices. Defining individual global positions for each part without using joints quickly becomes cumbersome and prone to error. Joints enable designers to make quick parametric changes to a design while preserving existing part relationships and maintaining design intent.
Figure 1. CAD assemblies contain valuable joint information de-scribing how parts are locally constrained and positioned together.
We use this weak supervision to learn a bottom-up approach to assembly. JoinABLe combines an encoder and joint axis predic-tion network together with a neurally guided joint pose search to assemble pairs of parts without class labels or human guidance.
However, fully defining joints in assemblies is time-consuming – roughly one third of time in CAD is spent do-ing assembly work [27]. As a result many assemblies have missing or partly defined joints. A learning-based approach capable of predicting joints could ease the burden of joint definition and enable other applications such as CAD as-sembly synthesis [56], robotic assembly [34], optimization of dynamic assemblies [72], part motion prediction [58], assembly-aware similarity search [5] and many more. Al-though joints for real world assemblies are configured in a bottom-up fashion, recent work largely takes a top-down approach to assembly related tasks [19, 23, 38]. Top-down approaches learn a global arrangement of parts from set ob-ject and part classes in carefully annotated data. An open challenge remains to learn to assemble parts without rely-ing on the strong object and part class priors provided in heavily annotated datasets. In this work we ask the follow-ing question, illustrated in Figure 1: Given a pair of parts, can we automatically assemble them without prior knowl-edge of the global design, class labels, or additional hu-man input? Solving this problem is a fundamental building block for leveraging learning-based methods with assem-blies. Our long-term motivation is to enable the next gener-ation of assembly aware tools that can increase the reuse of existing components and streamline robotic assembly and disassembly – important steps in reducing the negative im-pact of physical products [8, 29, 35, 41, 45].
To begin to address this challenge we introduce
JoinABLe (Joint Assembly Bottom-up Learning), our bottom-up approach to assembly that learns how parts con-nect locally to form parametric CAD joints. JoinABLe uses the weak supervision available in parametric CAD files, containing only partial joint labels, to automatically assem-ble pairs of parts. We make the following contributions:
• We propose a novel learning-based method to automat-ically assemble pairs of parts using the weak super-vision available in parametric CAD files. We do this without the help of object or part class labels, human annotation, or user guidance for the first time.
• We create and release the Fusion 360 Gallery assem-bly dataset, containing CAD assemblies with rich in-formation on joints, contact surfaces, holes, and the underlying assembly graph structure.
• We provide experimental results on both joint axis and joint pose prediction tasks, a human baseline study, and comparisons with multiple other methods.
Our results show that by making network predictions over a graph representation of solid models, we can out-perform multiple baseline methods while using fewer net-work parameters. We demonstrate that our approach per-forms well with difficult cases where heuristic algorithms can struggle and achieves an accuracy (79.53%) that ap-proaches human performance (80%) on the joint axis pre-diction task. 2.