Abstract
Data is the driving force of machine learning, with the amount and quality of training data often being more impor-tant for the performance of a system than architecture and training details. But collecting, processing and annotating real data at scale is difﬁcult, expensive, and frequently raises additional privacy, fairness and legal concerns. Synthetic data is a powerful tool with the potential to address these shortcomings: 1) it is cheap 2) supports rich ground-truth annotations 3) offers full control over data and 4) can cir-cumvent or mitigate problems regarding bias, privacy and licensing. Unfortunately, software tools for effective data generation are less mature than those for architecture de-sign and training, which leads to fragmented generation efforts. To address these problems we introduce Kubric, an open-source Python framework that interfaces with PyBullet and Blender to generate photo-realistic scenes, with rich annotations, and seamlessly scales to large jobs distributed over thousands of machines, and generating TBs of data.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of Kubric by presenting a series of 13 different generated datasets for tasks ranging from studying 3D NeRF models to optical ﬂow estimation.
We release Kubric, the used assets, all of the generation code, as well as the rendered datasets for reuse and modiﬁcation.
Figure 1. Example scene created and rendered with Kubric along with some of the automatically generated annotations. 1.

Introduction
High quality data – at scale – is essential for deep learning.
It is arguably as or more important than many architectural and training details. Nevertheless, even for many straightfor-ward vision tasks, collecting and curating sufﬁcient amounts
of data continues to be a daunting challenge. Some of the key barriers include the expense of high quality, detailed anno-tations, data diversity, control over task domain complexity, as well as concerns over privacy, fairness and licensing [4].
This paper advocates the use of synthetic data to circumvent many of these problems, for which we introduce Kubric, an open-source pipeline for generating realistic image and video data with rich ground truth annotations for myriad vision tasks.
Synthetic data has long been used for benchmark evalua-tion (e.g. for optical ﬂow [6, 7]), as it supports rich ground-truth annotations, and ﬁne-grained control over data com-plexity. It also enables systematic model evaluation under violations of model assumptions (e.g. rigidity). Synthetic data has also been used effectively for training. This in-cludes seminal work on 3D human pose estimation from
RGBD [85], and more recently on myriad tasks, including facial landmark detection [103], human pose from video [24], and semantic segmentation [116]. Photo-realism is often con-sidered essential for narrowing the generalization gap, but even without perfect realism, synthetic data can be remark-ably effective (e.g., ﬂying chairs [26], MPI-Sintel [13] and more recently AutoFlow [89]).
Unfortunately, effective software tools for data genera-tion are less mature than those for architecture design and training. It is therefore not surprising that most generation efforts, although costly, have been one-off and task speciﬁc.
Although challenging to design and develop, what is needed is a general framework for photo-realistic generation that supports reuse, replication, and shared assets, all at scale, en-abling workﬂows with large jobs concurrently on thousands of machines. Kubric addresses these issues with coherent framework, a simple Python API, and a full set of tools for generation at scale, integrating assets from multiple sources, with a common export data format for porting data into train-ing pipelines, and with rich annotations for myriad vision tasks. In summary, our key contributions are:
• We introduce Kubric1, a framework for generating photo-realistic synthetic datasets for myriad vision tasks, with ﬁne-grain control over data complexity and rich ground truth annotations.
• Kubric enables generation at scale, seamlessly running large jobs over thousands of machines, generating TBs of data in a standard export data format.
• The versatility of Kubric is demonstrated by the cre-ation of 13 datasets for new vision challenge problems, spanning 3D NeRF models to optical ﬂow estimation, along with benchmark results. 1Source code and datasets are available at https://github.com/ google-research/kubric. 2.