Abstract
Point cloud completion aims at completing geometric and topological shapes from a partial observation. How-ever, some topology of the original shape is missing, exist-ing methods directly predict the location of complete points, without predicting structured and topological information of the complete shape, which leads to inferior performance.
To better tackle the missing topology part, we propose
LAKe-Net, a novel topology-aware point cloud comple-tion model by localizing aligned keypoints, with a novel
Keypoints-Skeleton-Shape prediction manner. Specifically, our method completes missing topology using three steps: 1) Aligned Keypoint Localization. An asymmetric keypoint locator, including an unsupervised multi-scale keypoint de-tector and a complete keypoint generator, is proposed for lo-calizing aligned keypoints from complete and partial point clouds. We theoretically prove that the detector can cap-ture aligned keypoints for objects within a sub-category. 2) Surface-skeleton Generation. A new type of skeleton, named Surface-skeleton, is generated from keypoints based on geometric priors to fully represent the topological infor-mation captured from keypoints and better recover the local details. 3) Shape Refinement. We design a refinement sub-net where multi-scale surface-skeletons are fed into each recursive skeleton-assisted refinement module to assist the completion process. Experimental results show that our method achieves the state-of-the-art performance on point cloud completion. 1.

Introduction
The geometry and vision community has put huge ef-fort into point cloud processing, which is challenging due to the unordered, unstructured characteristics, and complex se-mantics of the point clouds. However, in real applications, occlusions and insufficient lighting lead to partial scans of real shapes and degrade the performance of subsequent pro-cessing. Point cloud completion focuses on predicting miss-*Corresponding authors.
Figure 1. Illustration of (a) visual comparison results of current completion methods, (b) completion process of our LAKe-Net, and (c) aligned keypoints. Compared with GRNet [34], PMP-Net [29], PoinTr [40] and Snowflake [32], LAKe-Net can effec-tively recover missing topology part (see Red ellipses). ing regions from partial observations, and shows its unique significance in many fundamental applications.
Recent works [7, 18, 26, 29, 32, 34, 35, 40, 41] for point cloud completion successfully utilized deep-learning meth-ods and achieved more plausible and flexible results com-pared with traditional geometric-based methods [8, 19, 23] and alignment-based methods [11, 12, 16]. However, most existing methods directly predict the location of complete points, without predicting structured and topological infor-mation of the complete shape, which leads to coarse results in missing regions (see Figure 1(a)).
Inspired by typical geometric modeling theory that a complete 3D object includes geometry and topology, e.g., coordinates and connectivity, we tend to predict both ge-ometric and structured topological information for point cloud completion, including keypoints and generated skele-ton. To this end, we propose a novel Keypoints-Skeleton-Shape prediction manner, including three steps: keypoint
localization, skeleton generation, and shape refinement.
We firstly introduce the keypoint localization. Different from down-sampled points, keypoints are evenly distributed across semantic parts of the shape, and are considered as a crucial representation of geometric structure which are widely-used in many vision applications [17,27,37]. There-fore, we hold the belief that once the keypoints and their connectivity are correctly localized, the entire geometry is determined. To this end, we wish to localize complete key-points according to partial inputs under the supervision of the ground truth keypoints. However, obtaining keypoints annotation for a large number of 3D data is difficult and expensive, so we propose an asymmetric keypoint loca-tor including an unsupervised multi-scale keypoint detec-tor (UMKD) and a complete keypoint generator (CKG) for complete and partial point cloud, respectively. For UMKD, we extract Aligned Keypoints, which means the order of keypoints are the same on different objects within a cer-tain category (Figure 1(c)), so as to represent more stable and richer information, and provide stronger supervision for predicting complete keypoints from partial inputs by CKG.
Since discrete and sparse keypoints are not enough for representing the whole objects, we leverage skeleton to better represent topological details.
Inspired by existing skeleton extraction methods [1, 5, 14], we propose a novel
Surface-skeleton, which is generated from keypoints based on geometric priors. Compared with other types of skele-tons, our surface-skeleton is a mixture of curves and trian-gle surfaces, and can represent more complex shape infor-mation. We integrate surface-skeletons with different fine-ness generated by multi-scale keypoints into the shape re-finement step to recover finer results. Specifically, we pro-pose a folding-based refinement subnet including three re-cursive skeleton-assisted refinement modules (RSR) follow-ing some of other completion methods [28, 32].
In general, we propose LAKe-Net, a novel topology-aware point cloud completion model by localizing aligned keypoints. The whole pipeline includes four parts: auto-encoder, asymmetric keypoints locator, surface-skeleton generator and the refinement subnet. We leverage pairs of complete and partial point cloud during training. In detail, the input point clouds (either complete or partial) are firstly fed into an auto-encoder to learn a feature embedding space and generate coarse and complete results. Then, we localize multi-scale keypoints using asymmetric keypoints locator and generate corresponding surface-skeletons. The multi-scale structures are fed into the refinement subnet to gener-ate fine output. The training process includes two stages for point cloud reconstruction and completion, respectively.
Overall, we summarize our main contributions as fol-lows: (1) We propose LAKe-Net, a novel topology-aware point cloud completion model that utilizes a structured rep-resentation of the surface as assistance, including Aligned
Keypoints and Surface-skeleton, with a new Keypoints-Skeleton-Shape prediction manner. (2) We introduce an asymmetric keypoint locator including an unsupervised multi-scale keypoint detector and a complete keypoint gen-erator, which can capture accurate keypoints for complete and partial objects in multiple categories, respectively. We theoretically prove that our detector detects aligned key-points within each sub-category. (3) We conduct point cloud completion experiments on two datasets, PCN and
ShapeNet55. Experimental results show that our LAKe-Net achieves the state-of-the-art performance on both datasets. 2.