Abstract
The inherent slow imaging speed of Magnetic Resonance
Image (MRI) has spurred the development of various ac-celeration methods, typically through heuristically under-sampling the MRI measurement domain known as k-space.
Recently, deep neural networks have been applied to re-construct undersampled k-space data and have shown im-proved reconstruction performance. While most of these methods focus on designing novel reconstruction networks or new training strategies for a given undersampling pat-tern, e.g., Cartesian undersampling or Non-Cartesian sam-pling, to date, there is limited research aiming to learn and optimize k-space sampling strategies using deep neural net-works. This work proposes a novel optimization framework to learn k-space sampling trajectories by considering it as an Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) problem that can be solved using neural ODE. In particular, the sampling of k-space data is framed as a dynamic system, in which neu-ral ODE is formulated to approximate the system with ad-ditional constraints on MRI physics. In addition, we have also demonstrated that trajectory optimization and image reconstruction can be learned collaboratively for improved imaging efficiency and reconstruction performance. Exper-iments were conducted on different in-vivo datasets (e.g., brain and knee images) acquired with different sequences.
Initial results have shown that our proposed method can generate better image quality in accelerated MRI than con-ventional undersampling schemes in Cartesian and Non-Cartesian acquisitions. 1.

Introduction
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is a powerful clin-ical tool for disease diagnosis [23]. MRI is non-invasive, radiation-free, and can provide excellent soft-tissue con-trast, making it an ideal imaging modality for various neuro-logical, oncological, and musculoskeletal applications [7].
Standard MRI acquisition sequentially collects the k-space
*Corresponding Author. data using segmented sampling patterns composed of mul-tiple shots (e.g., spokes, or interleaves) [5, 7]. However, this acquisition scheme typically requires a long scan time, which is challenging for subjects who cannot tolerate long scans due to injuries, pain, discomfort, or claustrophobia.
Notably, the long scan also makes data acquisition sensi-tive to different types of motion, which can cause image degradation reflected as motion artifact [51]. Therefore, ac-celerated MRI techniques have played an essential role in reducing MRI acquisition time.
Parallel imaging [14,36,44] and compressed sensing [26, 27, 32] have been extensively investigated for accelerating
MRI over the past decades. Parallel imaging uses multi-coil information to estimate the missing k-space data; com-pressed sensing leverages image sparsity to reconstruct un-dersampled k-space data using a constrained nonlinear im-age reconstruction framework. Both techniques can in-crease imaging efficiency in MRI. Recently, deep learning methods using neural networks have been investigated to re-construct undersampled k-space data through learning mul-tilevel image representation to remove image artifacts and noises. Various techniques have been proposed using unroll network [6, 16, 42], end-to-end mapping [10, 17, 48], do-main transfer learning [2, 55], adversarial learning [28, 37], and unsupervised learning [24]. However, while those methods focus on developing novel reconstruction networks or improving network training strategies, very few studies have investigated the optimization of k-space acquisition for learning-based reconstruction. The k-space undersampling patterns are usually kept the same as those previously used in parallel imaging and compressed sensing.
This study will investigate accelerating MRI by learning k-space sampling to maximize image acquisition efficiency for deep learning-based image reconstruction. The k-space acquisition is formulated as a dynamic optimization process and is solved using a neural Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) [9]. This ODE system is first initialized with reg-ular Cartesian and Non-Cartesian k-space trajectories, and the trajectories are then dynamically adjusted towards an optimal pattern that provides the best acquisition efficiency.
Furthermore, a joint training strategy to optimize both the
neural ODE system and a deep learning reconstruction model is implemented, providing optimal data acquisition and image reconstruction. Experiments were conducted on a publicly available MRI database, fastMRI [52], to evalu-ate the proposed method. A comparative study showed that the proposed method could improve reconstruction perfor-mance for Cartesian and Non-Cartesian acquisition using different MRI image sequences. The contributions of this work are summarized as followings:
• The paper introduces a novel k-space acquisition op-timization strategy for accelerated MRI using neural
ODE, which has never been presented previously to the best of our knowledge.
• We synergistically combined neural ODE and a deep learning-based reconstruction system to optimize k-space trajectories and a reconstruction model to-wards maximal acquisition efficiency and optimal reconstruction performance for Cartesian and Non-Cartesian acquisitions.
• The k-space trajectory optimization is conditioned on
MRI hardware constraints considering the gradient amplitude and slew rate limits. This creates a physi-cally feasible trajectory for practical MRI acquisition.
• Various experiments demonstrated that the proposed method could significantly improve acquisition ef-ficiency and image quality for Cartesian and Non-Cartesian imaging in different anatomical structures and image contrasts. 2.