Abstract
Deep Implicit Function (DIF) has gained popularity as an efficient 3D shape representation. To capture geome-try details, current methods usually learn DIF using lo-cal latent codes, which discretize the space into a reg-ular 3D grid (or octree) and store local codes in grid points (or octree nodes). Given a query point, the local feature is computed by interpolating its neighboring lo-cal codes with their positions. However, the local codes are constrained at discrete and regular positions like grid points, which makes the code positions difficult to be op-timized and limits their representation ability. To solve this problem, we propose to learn DIF with Dynamic Code
Cloud, named DCC-DIF. Our method explicitly associates local codes with learnable position vectors, and the posi-tion vectors are continuous and can be dynamically opti-In ad-mized, which improves the representation ability. dition, we propose a novel code position loss to optimize the code positions, which heuristically guides more local codes to be distributed around complex geometric details.
In contrast to previous methods, our DCC-DIF represents 3D shapes more efficiently with a small amount of local codes, and improves the reconstruction quality. Experi-ments demonstrate that DCC-DIF achieves better perfor-mance over previous methods. Code and data are available at https://github.com/lity20/DCCDIF. 1.

Introduction
Learning 3D shape representation is important for many downstream applications in 3D computer vision [3, 14–19].
*The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu. This work was sup-ported by National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFB0505400, 2020YFF0304100), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62072268), and in part by Tsinghua-Kuaishou Institute of Future Media
Data.
Figure 1. Illustration comparison between our method and other methods. In (a), we select the grid-based DIF (ConvONet [34]).
In (b), we show the octree-based DIF (NGLOD [38]). (c) is our
DCC-DIF. (d) is Reference. The first row shows the code positions of different methods, where the warmer color indicates the local codes are closer to the surface. Compared with other methods, in which code positions are discrete and regular, our code posi-tions are continuous and more flexible. The second row shows the reconstruction results, where our method can reconstruct highly detailed geometry of complex shapes, like teeth.
Explicit 3D representations such as meshes, voxels and point clouds have been widely used in various tasks [22, 30, 35, 36, 42–47]. Recently, deep implicit function (DIF)
[4, 26–28, 31, 33, 48] has received more popularity as an ef-ficient 3D shape representation, which learns latent codes of 3D shapes by predicting a signed distance or inside/outside for each query point. Different from explicit 3D represen-tations, DIF can be stored compactly and learn shape priors by the network. Besides, it is simple and natural to use DIF in learning-based tasks because of its differentiable ability.
Previous DIF approaches [4, 31, 33] encode the entire 3D shape into a single global latent code through the auto-encoder or auto-decoder [39] framework, which leads to
computed by interpolating local codes with their positional weights, which are computed using the distances relative to this query point.
In contrast with previous local DIF methods [5, 6, 34, 38], which store the local codes in dis-crete and regular grids, the positions of local codes used in our method are continuous and flexible. Specially, our code positions can be dynamically optimized, where the position vectors is learnable and can be updated by back-propagation and gradient descent. Therefore, we name our method Dy-namic Code Cloud (DCC), as shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2. In addition, we design a novel Code Position (CP) loss to op-timize the positions of local codes, where more local codes are heuristically guided to distribute around complex geo-metric details. With the help of CP loss, our method can represent 3D shapes more efficiently with a small amount of local codes. As a result, when using the same number of local codes as previous methods, our method achieves bet-ter results and reconstructs highly detailed geometry of 3D shapes. Our main contributions are summarized as follows.
• We propose a novel DCC-DIF to learn deep implicit function of 3D shapes. Compared with previous meth-ods which limit the local codes at discrete and regular grid points, the code positions in DCC-DIF are con-tinuous and can be dynamically optimized, which im-proves the representation ability.
• We further propose a novel code position (CP) loss to optimize the positions of local codes, so that more local codes are distributed around complex geometric details. With the help of CP loss, our DCC-DIF can represent 3D shapes with higher quality and efficiency.
• Compared to previous methods, our method can achieve better accuracy with fewer number of local codes when reconstructing highly detailed geometry of 3D shapes. Experiments demonstrate our DCC-DIF can achieve the state-of-the-art results. 2.