Abstract
Mirrors generally lack a consistent visual appearance, making mirror detection very challenging. Although recent works that are based on exploiting contextual contrasts and corresponding relations have achieved good results, heavily relying on contextual contrasts and corresponding relations to discover mirrors tend to fail in complex real-world scenes, where a lot of objects, e.g., doorways, may have similar features as mirrors. We observe that humans tend to place mirrors in relation to certain objects for specific functional purposes, e.g., a mirror above the sink. Inspired by this observation, we propose a model to exploit the semantic associations between the mirror and its surrounding objects for a reliable mirror localization.
Our model first acquires class-specific knowledge of the surrounding objects via a semantic side-path. It then uses two novel modules to exploit semantic associations: 1) an Associations Exploration (AE) Module to extract the associations of the scene objects based on fully connected graph models, and 2) a Quadruple-Graph (QG) Module to facilitate the diffusion and aggregation of semantic association knowledge using graph convolutions. Extensive experiments show that our method outperforms the existing methods and sets the new state-of-the-art on both PMD dataset (f-measure: 0.844) and MSD dataset (f-measure:
Code is available at https : / / github . 0.889). com / guanhuankang / Learning - Semantic -Associations-for-Mirror-Detection. 1.

Introduction
Mirrors appear everywhere in our daily life.
In gen-eral, they lack a consistent appearance, as their appearances mainly depend on their surroundings. Due to this special property, the presence of mirrors can affect many vision tasks [7, 53]. They are also considered as a potential haz-ardous factor for computer vision tasks [49]. Hence, mirror detection is important.
There are a few works that address the mirror detection
*Rynson W.H. Lau is the corresponding author, and he leads this project.
RGB Input MirrorNet [47] PMD-Net [24]
Ours
GT
Figure 1. Existing mirror detection methods based on learning contextual contrasts [47] or corresponding relations [24] falsely identify some distractors (e.g., the doorway in the 1st row and the painting in the 2nd row) as mirrors, and miss the mirror (3rd row) when the mirror is captured at an oblique angle to the camera along with some occluding lights. In contrast, our method considers the semantic associations between mirrors and their surrounding ob-jects (e.g., the vanity table in the 1st row and the sink in the 2nd and 3rd rows), yielding accurate results. problem [24, 30, 47]. Yang et al. [47] propose a model to learn contextual contrasts/discontinuities between mir-ror and non-mirror regions, while Lin et al. [24] propose a model to learn object correspondences between mirror and non-mirror regions. On the other hand, Mei et al. [30] propose to learn depth discontinuities between mirror and non-mirror regions in RGBD images. All these methods are essentially based on learning a binary relationship be-tween mirror and non-mirror regions. While they may be effective in simple scenes, relying on learning a binary rela-tionship between mirror and non-mirror regions can easily fail in real-world scenes, in which there are many objects (or distractors) that may possess similar properties, such as doorways, windows, wardrobe doors and photo frames.
In this work, we observe that humans typically place mir-rors in certain relationships with some specific objects for functional purposes. For example, we usually put a mir-ror above the vanity table in the bedroom to help with the morning makeup (the top image in Figure 1) or above a sink in the washroom to allow us to check our look after washing our faces or hands (the second and third images in Figure 1). This observation aligns with studies in cogni-tive neuroscience [2, 3, 18, 32] that the surrounding objects
can provide a complementary and effective source of con-textual information, helping the visual system to locate the target object quickly and confidently. Based on this obser-vation, we propose to learn the semantic knowledge of mir-rors and their surrounding objects, and explore the semantic associations between them to help detect and locate mirrors more reliably. As shown in Figure 1, since existing meth-ods, e.g., [24, 47], rely on learning the contextual contrasts or correspondence relations, they can easily be confused by objects that are similar to mirrors, such as the doorway in the top image and the painting in the second image. In con-trast, our approach based on learning the semantic associ-ations can correctly detect the mirrors but not objects that look like mirrors in the first two images, and is able to iden-tify the mirror in a difficult case as shown in the third image in which the mirror is in an oblique angle to the camera to-gether with some lights hanging around it.
The proposed model follows an encoder-decoder archi-tecture.
In parallel to an encoder-decoder, we add a se-mantic side-path for scene object discovery and semantic knowledge learning. Our model includes two novel mod-ules to exploit semantic associations: 1) an Associations
Exploration (AE) Module to explore scene object associ-ations, and 2) a Quadruple-Graph (QG) Module to facili-tate diffusion and aggregation of the semantic association knowledge. The AE module includes a scene-aware GCN to model the mutual relationships between objects, and a spatial-aware GCN for spatial relationship inference. The
QG module employs self-attention [39] and reversed self-attention mechanisms to facilitate the propagation of knowl-edge. Both AE and QG modules are built with graph con-volutions, enabling an efficient long-range semantic con-text aggregation. We conduct comprehensive experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach and show that our method outperforms relevant state-of-the-art meth-ods, both quantitatively and qualitatively, on two mirror de-tection benchmarks, PMD [24] and MSD [47].
Our main contributions of this work are as follows:
• We present a novel mirror detection approach that learns the semantic associations between mirrors and their surrounding objects for reliable mirror detection.
• We propose a novel Associations Exploration (AE)
Module to infer scene object associations with fully connected graph models, and a novel Quadruple-Graph (QG) Module to facilitate the diffusion and aggregation of semantic association knowledge using graph convolutions. We verify the effectiveness of the proposed modules with comprehensive studies.
• Extensive experiments show that our method outper-forms existing state-of-the-art methods both quantita-tively and qualitatively on the two popular mirror de-tection benchmarks, PMD [24] and MSD [47]. 2.