Abstract
Unsupervised point cloud completion aims at estimating the corresponding complete point cloud of a partial point cloud in an unpaired manner. It is a crucial but challenging problem since there is no paired partial-complete supervi-sion that can be exploited directly. In this work, we pro-pose a novel framework, which learns a unified and struc-tured latent space that encoding both partial and complete point clouds. Specifically, we map a series of related par-tial point clouds into multiple complete shape and occlu-sion code pairs and fuse the codes to obtain their repre-sentations in the unified latent space. To enforce the learn-ing of such a structured latent space, the proposed method adopts a series of constraints including structured ranking regularization, latent code swapping constraint, and dis-tribution supervision on the related partial point clouds.
By establishing such a unified and structured latent space, better partial-complete geometry consistency and shape completion accuracy can be achieved. Extensive experi-ments show that our proposed method consistently outper-forms state-of-the-art unsupervised methods on both syn-thetic ShapeNet and real-world KITTI, ScanNet, and Mat-terport3D datasets. 1.

Introduction
Point cloud completion aims at estimating the corre-sponding complete point cloud of a partial point cloud, which is an important task and can assist downstream appli-cations such as shape classification [17,26–28,34], robotics navigation [12, 31] and scene understanding [1, 2, 10, 19], as raw point clouds are often noisy, sparse and partial.
Although fully supervised point cloud completion meth-ods [21,22,25,43,45, 48–51] have achieved impressive per-formance, they heavily rely on large-scale paired partial-It is, however, difficult to collect complete training data. paired data from real-world scans. Additionally, such com-Figure 1.
Illustration of the unified and structured latent space where any point cloud can be represented as a complete shape code z and a corresponding occlusion code o. We complete the partial point cloud via properly regularizing such codes in an un-supervised manner. Best viewed in color. pletion networks trained on paired real data or paired syn-thetic data cannot sufficiently generalize to actual scans, as their data distributions might not well match those of train-ing samples.
A promising alternate solution is to learn a comple-tion network in an unpaired manner following the setup of [6, 41, 44, 52]. However, it is a more challenging setup since there is no paired and accurate point-wise supervision that can be adopted directly. To tackle the problem, differ-ent methods are proposed to adopt different types of super-vision from the unpaired data. A representative work [52] adopts GAN inversion for 3D shape completion. It trains a complete point cloud generator with adversarial losses.
During inference, an optimal shape code can be recovered via hundreds of gradient descent iterations by minimizing a partial-complete consistency loss. The consistency1 be-tween the predicted point cloud and the input can be main-tained. However, the inverse optimization is generally un-stable and easy to stuck at local minima if using unsuitable 1Consistency describes whether the predicted point cloud represents
*H. Li and K. Lin are the co-corresponding authors. the same object as the partial input.
initial code, unsuitable learning rate or too many iterations, etc. The inversion process is much more time-consuming than direct methods (∼3500x). Another representative un-supervised work [41] exploits cycle supervisions to enhance consistency indirectly by learning bidirectional transforma-tions between the latent spaces of complete and incomplete shapes (point clouds). However, the bidirectional transfor-mations need to be separately modeled and are difficult to learn, especially for the complete-to-partial mapping. If one direction is not learned well, the other direction would be in-fluenced correspondingly. In summary, without direct and accurate paired supervision, designing proper supervision and applying to unsupervised point cloud completion is of great importance to this task.
To this end, we propose to create a unified and struc-tured latent space for encoding both partial and complete shapes. To apply strong supervisions for unsupervised point cloud completion, we make an assumption that each partial shape is created by occluding a complete one. If a complete shape is occluded to become partial in the 3D space, its code in the latent space should also be “occluded” from a com-plete shape code accordingly. We model the “occlusion” of a complete code in the latent space as weighting each of its dimension with a weight in [0, 1]. However, instead of manually determining the occlusion weights, we make them learned from the training data. In this way, the complete and partial shapes are strongly bounded in a unified latent space.
In addition, to better regularize the relation between partial point clouds from the same complete shape, the occlusion code of a more occluded shape is required to have smaller weights than that of a less occluded shape.
Specifically, to learn the unified latent space, we repre-sent any partial or complete point cloud by two codes: a complete shape code and an occlusion code. The complete shape code can be fed into a completion decoder to recon-struct the corresponding complete point cloud. The “oc-cluded” shape code via multiplying the above two codes can be fed into a partial decoder to reconstruct the partial shape. Furthermore, we create a series of related partial point clouds by gradually removing more points from a par-tial shape and apply ranking constraints to their occlusion codes by N-pair loss [36] according to their relative occlu-sion degrees. Their complete shape codes are required to be equal since they represent the same object. By adopt-ing such properly designed strong supervisions, more ac-curate complete point clouds with better geometric consis-tency and shape details can be reconstructed.
We experiment on popular point cloud completion benchmarks, including a synthetic dataset (ShapeNet [23]) and real datasets (KITTI [13], ScanNet [9] and Matter-port3D [3]). The proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised methods [6, 41, 44, 52]. Our main con-tributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose to learn a unified and structured latent space for unsupervised point cloud completion, which encodes both partial and complete point clouds to im-prove partial-complete geometry consistency and lead to better shape completion accuracy.
• We propose to constrain the complete and occlusion codes of a series of related partial point clouds to en-hance the learning of the structured latent space.
• Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method over state-of-the-art unsupervised point cloud completion methods on both synthetic and real datasets. 2.