Abstract
In this paper, we ﬁrst investigate the class-wise visual quality imbalance problem of scene images generated by
GANs. The tendency is empirically found that the class-wise visual qualities are highly correlated with the dominance of object classes in the training data in terms of their scales and appearance frequencies. Speciﬁcally, the synthesized qualities of small and less frequent object classes tend to be low. To address this, we propose a novel attention module,
Local Attention Pyramid (LAP) module tailored for scene image synthesis, that encourages GANs to generate diverse object classes in a high quality by explicit spread of high at-tention scores to local regions, since objects in scene images are scattered over the entire images. Moreover, our LAP as-signs attention scores in a multiple scale to reﬂect the scale diversity of various objects. The experimental evaluations on three different datasets show consistent improvements in
Frechet Inception Distance (FID) and Frechet Segmentation
Distance (FSD) over the state-of-the-art baselines. Further-more, we apply our LAP module to various GANs methods to demonstrate a wide applicability of our LAP module. 1.

Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [7] has lead the remarkable progress in image generation tasks. Its recent advances have reached to generate images nearly indistin-guishable from real-world images even on the large-scale benchmarks [15,16]. Nonetheless, generating diverse objects in a scene image has not been received sufﬁcient attention in the ﬁeld. The datasets which most approaches have been focusing on usually have a single object centered at the im-age such as human faces. However, the real-world scene images have various objects in diverse regions, as all we know. In this aspect, we raise a question “can the GANs produce scene images including diverse objects in a high quality?”.
In the GANs framework, the generator learns to produce high-quality samples to deceive the discriminator. In the
*Corresponding author scene image generation, the generator tends to ﬁrst synthe-size big and frequently appeared object classes since it can be a shortcut to reduce a discrepancy between real and fake distributions. This leads the generator to become just an expert at drawing the dominant objects in the scene. It can cause a signiﬁcant class-wise visual quality imbalance prob-lem, especially low qualities for the object classes with small scales or low appearance frequencies. Let us denote those object classes as non-dominant objects throughout this paper.
To support the above raised argument, we ﬁrst conduct preliminary study in the scene image generation with the state-of-the-art GANs (i.e. StyleGAN [13]). We measure the class-wise quality scores based on the segmentation results (Sec. 3 and Fig. 1). The pilot study shows that GANs tend to produce non-dominant objects in lower quality. This empirical evidence motivates us to develop a way to ensure balanced quality over diverse object classes.
To mitigate the aforementioned problem, we propose a simple yet effective attention module, Local Attention
Pyramid (LAP) tailored for the scene generation, that spreads attentions over the entire image regions and drives high local attentions in various scales. Speciﬁcally, our LAP module receives feature maps as its input and ﬁrst determine coarse locations of each object class by employing depthwise convolution layers. Since depthwise convolution has no intervention between channels, we can infer the feature maps that maintain feature representations of each channel which is highly related to parts of the object [1]. We then divide feature maps into several feature patches and perform an instance normalization for each patch, before feeding them into the sigmoid function. By doing this, LAP ampliﬁes the locally high activation scores in each patch. Thus, it spreads high attentions to diverse regions that can encourage the features of various objects scattered in image. To handle the diversity of object scales, our LAP module infers multiple attention maps with various patch sizes based on the feature map pyramid.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• We highlight that GANs suffer from the class-wise im-age quality imbalance problem in the scene synthesis task. In its empirical investigation, we found that GANs more concentrate on generating big and frequently ap-peared objects and thus provide inferior visual qualities for the non-dominant objects.
• We introduce a novel Local Attention Pyramid (LAP) module to address the class-wise quality imbalance problem that scatters the attentions over different re-gions with locally high scores by reﬂecting the charac-teristics of the scene images.
• Since our LAP is a generic module, it can be applied to various GANs architectures, loss functions, and training strategies. We apply the LAP to various state-of-the-art GANs methods, and evaluate on large-scale scene image benchmarks with various quality measures. Ex-perimental results show that the LAP signiﬁcantly and consistently improves image quality with very few ad-ditional learnable parameters. 2.