Abstract
Recent works with an implicit neural function shed light on representing images in arbitrary resolution. However, a standalone multi-layer perceptron shows limited perfor-mance in learning high-frequency components.
In this paper, we propose a Local Texture Estimator (LTE), a dominant-frequency estimator for natural images, enabling an implicit function to capture fine details while recon-structing images in a continuous manner. When jointly trained with a deep super-resolution (SR) architecture, LTE is capable of characterizing image textures in 2D Fourier space. We show that an LTE-based neural function achieves favorable performance against existing deep SR methods within an arbitrary-scale factor. Furthermore, we demon-strate that our implementation takes the shortest running time compared to previous works. 1.

Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) is one of the most fundamental problems in computer vision and graphics.
SISR aims to reconstruct high-resolution (HR) images from its degraded low-resolution (LR) counterpart. Dominant ap-proaches [3, 5, 14, 15, 18, 24, 34, 35] are to extract feature maps using a deep vision architecture and then upsample to
HR images at the end of a network. However, we need to train and store several models for each scale factor when an upsampler is implemented by sub-pixel convolution [24].
In contrast, arbitrary-scale SR methods [4, 9] are promising since such ideas pave the way to restore images in a contin-uous manner with only a single network.
Recently, implicit neural functions parameterized by a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) achieved remarkable perfor-mance in representing continuous-domain signals, such as images [4], occupancy [19], signed distance [21], shape rep-resentation [11], and view synthesis [20, 26]. Such MLPs take coordinates as inputs and are trained in a framework of gradient descent optimization and machine learning. In-*Corresponding author.
Figure 1. Overview of Local Texture Estimator (LTE). Our LTE estimates dominant frequencies and corresponding Fourier coeffi-cients for natural images. Then, an MLP makes use of the esti-mated essential Fourier information to reconstruct an HR image in arbitrary resolution. We provide low-frequency information by adding an upscaled LR image to the output of MLP. spired by recent progress in implicit representation, LIIF [4] replaced sub-pixel convolution with MLPs to accomplish arbitrary-scale SR, even at substantial scale factors.
One limitation of implicit neural representations is that a standalone MLP is biased towards learning low-frequency components [23] and fails to capture fine details [29]. Such phenomenon is referred to as spectral bias, and recent lines of research in resolving this problem are projecting input coordinates into a high-dimensional Fourier feature space
[20, 29] or substituting a ReLU with a sinusoidal activation
[25]. Motivated from previous works, we study arbitrary-scale SISR problems through the lens of Fourier analysis.
In this paper, we propose a Local Texture Estimator (LTE), a dominant-frequency estimator for natural images, to allow an implicit function to learn fine details while restoring images in arbitrary resolution. We assume that an implicit function prioritizes learning image textures when utilizing dominant frequencies of images, as described in
Fig. 1. Let us take an example from an image with vertical textures. Intuitively, the dominant frequencies of such an image are located on an x-axis in 2D Fourier space. We observe that LTE is capable of extracting such dominant frequencies, characterizing image textures in 2D Fourier space, when jointly trained with a deep SR architecture, such as EDSR [15], RDN [35], and SwinIR [14]. In ad-dition to extracting dominant frequencies, we show that es-timating Fourier coefficients is also essential in improving a representational power of an implicit function in Sec. 5.3.
Short computation time is essential in SR applications.
In addition, restoring larger than 2K-sized images is a memory-consuming task. Hence, we study the computa-tion time of our LTE at various memory conditions and demonstrate that our approach is faster compared to pre-vious works regardless of memory setting in Sec. 6.
In summary, our main contributions are as follows:
• We point out that a deep SR network followed by LTE is capable of estimating dominant frequencies and cor-responding Fourier coefficients for natural images.
• We show that an implicit representation function for arbitrary resolution prioritizes learning high-frequency details when essential Fourier information is estimated by LTE.
• We investigate the computation time of our LTE at several memory settings and demonstrate that our ap-proach is faster compared to previous works. 2.