Abstract
Noise modeling and reduction are fundamental tasks in low-level computer vision. They are particularly important for smartphone cameras relying on small sensors that ex-hibit visually noticeable noise. There has recently been re-newed interest in using data-driven approaches to improve camera noise models via neural networks. These data-driven approaches target noise present in the raw-sensor image before it has been processed by the camera’s image signal processor (ISP). Modeling noise in the RAW-rgb do-main is useful for improving and testing the in-camera de-noising algorithm; however, there are situations where the camera’s ISP does not apply denoising or additional de-noising is desired when the RAW-rgb domain image is no
In such cases, the sensor noise propa-longer available. gates through the ISP to the ﬁnal rendered image encoded in standard RGB (sRGB). The nonlinear steps on the ISP culminate in a signiﬁcantly more complex noise distribution in the sRGB domain and existing raw-domain noise models are unable to capture the sRGB noise distribution. We pro-pose a new sRGB-domain noise model based on normaliz-ing ﬂows that is capable of learning the complex noise dis-tribution found in sRGB images under various ISO levels.
Our normalizing ﬂows-based approach outperforms other models by a large margin in noise modeling and synthesis tasks. We also show that image denoisers trained on noisy images synthesized with our noise model outperforms those trained with noise from baselines models. 1.

Introduction
Modeling and reducing noise are long-standing prob-lems in computer vision and image processing with a rich history (e.g., [10, 17, 18]). While simple models, like sim-ple additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN), have often been used in testing denoising methods, they are well-known not to be realistic and serves only as a rough approximation for real-world camera noise. When realistic noise models are needed, more sophisticated models, such as Poisson-Gaussian [8] or Heteroscedastic Gaussian models [7, 19],
*Work performed while interns at the Samsung AI Center–Toronto.
Figure 1. Noisy images generated by (a) a full covariance Gaus-sian model, (b) Noise Flow [2], and our model (c) compared with real images (d). Images are from the SIDD dataset [1]. are used to model the noise distribution observed on camera sensors. While such models are more realistic than AWGN, they too are often not able to fully capture real camera noise distributions.
In recent years, data-driven noise models have been pro-posed that learn the noise distribution directly from large datasets of noisy sensor images (e.g., [2, 4, 9, 20, 21, 30, 31]). These methods focus on modeling the noise present in the raw sensor images. Modeling noise in the RAW-rgb domain is useful as denoising algorithms are typically ap-plied by the camera’s image signal processor (ISP) hard-ware. Such noise reduction is applied early in the ISP’s processing pipeline (often in the Bayer processing stages)
Figure 2. sRGB noise variance as a function of clean image intensity on SIDD [1]. These plots exhibit highly variable and unpredictable behavior, in contrast to RAW where there is typically a linear relation between noise variance and intensity. Consequently, we cannot use traditional image noise models like AWGN and NLF and instead propose a novel sRGB focused noise model based on normalizing ﬂows. before the image is rendered to its ﬁnal sRGB representtion with tonal and color photo-ﬁnishing algorithms which are applied to improve the image’s perceptual quality.
It is not unusual, however, for the in-camera denoising to be disabled, not present or insufﬁcient. Further, most cameras do not save in RAW-rgb by default, making sRGB images far more ubiquitous. In such cases, the noisy sensor image is rendered through the camera’s ISP, including the photo-ﬁnishing algorithms that apply complex, nonlinear operations to manipulate the image’s tonal and color values.
The resulting noise distribution in the ﬁnal sRGB is notably more complex than in the unprocessed RAW-rgb space and existing RAW-rgb focused noise models become ineffective for modeling the sRGB noise, as shown in Fig. 1.
Contributions. We focus on modeling and synthesizing sRGB image noise, where the in-camera nonlinear process-ing has altered the noise characteristics from that of the camera’s sensor. We begin with an analysis that shows that existing noise models targeting sensor noise in the RAW-rgb domain are not well suited for sRGB images. We then propose a generative model that combines recent advances in normalizing ﬂows and captures effects of different gain (ISO) settings and camera types on sRGB image noise. We show that our sRGB noise model is superior to several base-line noise models. We further investigate our model’s abil-ity to synthesize noise by training a denoiser using noisy images sampled from the model. We show that this denoiser achieves signiﬁcantly higher performance compared to de-noisers trained on synthesized data from baseline models. 2.