Abstract
This paper presents a motion data augmentation scheme incorporating motion synthesis encouraging di-versity and motion correction imposing physical plau-sibility. This motion synthesis consists of our modified
Variational AutoEncoder (VAE) and Inverse Kinemat-ics (IK). In this VAE, our proposed sampling-near-samples method generates various valid motions even with insufficient training motion data. Our IK-based motion synthesis method allows us to generate a va-riety of motions semi-automatically. Since these two schemes generate unrealistic artifacts in the synthe-sized motions, our motion correction rectifies them.
This motion correction scheme consists of imitation learning with physics simulation and subsequent mo-tion debiasing. For this imitation learning, we pro-pose the PD-residual force that significantly acceler-ates the training process. Furthermore, our motion debiasing successfully offsets the motion bias induced by imitation learning to maximize the effect of aug-mentation. As a result, our method outperforms pre-vious noise-based motion augmentation methods by a large margin on both Recurrent Neural Network-based and Graph Convolutional Network-based human mo-tion prediction models. The code is available at https:
//github.com/meaten/MotionAug. 1.

Introduction
Human motion prediction, which forecasts future body poses based on past poses, is a crucial tech-nique for human-robot interaction [22,23,28,29,41], au-tonomous driving [30], VR/AR applications [18], per-formance capture [8, 32, 33, 43, 44], etc. However, these applications are limited because of the lack of train-ing motion data, which results in low prediction accu-racy. This data insufficiency is caused by the enormous cost of motion data acquisition, such as motion capture equipment, recordings, post-processing, and denoising.
Such data insufficiency can be alleviated by Data for example, image recogni-Augmentation (DA), tion [25,39]. Compared with image data augmentation, however, DA for motion data is hard to address because simple numerical transformations (e.g., additive noise) may generate physically-implausible motions such as too high velocities or floating motions.
This paper presents a novel motion data augmenta-tion approach, including motion synthesis and motion correction. Our motion synthesis uses Variational Au-toEncoder (VAE) [24] to exploit a training data distri-bution and Inverse Kinematics (IK) to exploit human knowledge, shown in “Motion Synthesis” in Fig. 1. Al-though most of our synthesized motions are physically-plausible, we observed some of them have unrealistic artifacts, which lead to the low accuracy of human mo-tion prediction. These artifacts are corrected with our proposed motion correction method. This correction method uses (i) imitation learning with physics sim-ulation to rectify these artifacts and (ii) subsequent motion debiasing to offset biases imposed by the mis-match between the bodies of a human and the char-acter during imitation learning (“Motion Correction” in Fig. 1). Our contributions for motion diversity and physical plausibility are as follows: 1. VAE-based human-motion synthesis: Our generative model with adversarial training in se-quencewise and framewise, and sampling-near-samples can generate plausible motions even with insufficient motion data. 2. IK-based human-motion synthesis: Com-pared with annotating IK target points in all frames as the standard IK does, our method re-quires less effort because only a target sampling space for a keyframe is manually given. 3. PD-residual force: We propose the PD-residual force that accelerates the training of imitation learning in a physics simulator to rectify the phys-ical implausibility of synthesized motions.
Figure 1. Overview of our proposed motion data augmentation. Original motions are augmented independently using our VAE- and IK-based syntheses. We also propose (i) motion correction where the synthesized motions are modified to be physically-plausible using imitation learning, a physics simulator, and (ii) subsequent motion debiasing. 4. Motion debiasing: Our motion debiasing suc-cessfully offsets the motion bias induced by the imitation learning to maximize the effect of our data augmentation. several kinds of physically-implausible motions because it is difficult to learn such physical plausibility from a limited number of training motion data, especially in data insufficient settings. 2.