Abstract 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32
A novel ordinal regression algorithm, called moving win-dow regression (MWR), is proposed in this paper. First, we propose the notion of relative rank (ρ-rank), which is a new order representation scheme for input and reference instances. Second, we develop global and local relative re-gressors (ρ-regressors) to predict ρ-ranks within entire and speciﬁc rank ranges, respectively. Third, we reﬁne an ini-tial rank estimate iteratively by selecting two reference in-stances to form a search window and then estimating the
ρ-rank within the window. Extensive experiments results show that the proposed algorithm achieves the state-of-the-art performances on various benchmark datasets for fa-cial age estimation and historical color image classiﬁca-tion. The codes are available at https://github. com/nhshin-mcl/MWR. 1.

Introduction
Ordinal regression aims to predict the rank of an object instance. It is widely used for computer vision tasks, in-cluding facial age estimation [35] and historical color image (HCI) classiﬁcation [34]. Thus, various ordinal regression techniques have been developed.
Rank estimation, however, remains challenging because there is no clear distinction between ranks in many cases.
For example, in facial age estimation, the aging process [2, 46], causing variations in facial shapes, sizes, and texture, has large individual differences due to numerous factors such as genes, diet, and lifestyle, and there are no clear ag-ing characteristics in each age class. To address this issue, extensive researches have been carried out. Recently, Li et al. [26] used tens of local regressors, each of which learns aging characteristics within a speciﬁc age range. Also, Lim et al. [27] proposed the notion of order learning, and Lee and Kim [22] improved it based on the order-identity de-composition.
To measure the quantity of something, it would be easier and more accurate if some references are available [4]. For example, we can estimate the length of an object more ac-curately if we have a one-meter bar as a reference. In this
Input Image
Age: 29 20 21
: Initial Result 22 24 23
: Previous Result 25 26 27 28
: Refinement Result  29 30 32 31
: Final Result
Figure 1. In the MWR algorithm for facial age estimation, an ini-tial rank (age) estimate of the input image is reﬁned iteratively by estimating the ρ-rank within a search window (orange bar). The window is bounded by the known ranks of two reference images, and the ρ-rank quantiﬁes how much older or younger the input is than the references. Each window is centered around the previ-ous result. It is strongly recommended to watch the accompanying video for an overview of MWR. Also, note that MWR is applica-ble to general ordinal regression tasks, as well as age estimation. case, our brains measure the ratio between the lengths of the object and the bar, instead of the absolute length of the ob-ject. Similarly, multiple references of different ranks can of-fer a useful ordinal scale in rank estimation, as a one-meter bar does in the length measurement. Therefore, rather than predicting the absolute rank of an instance directly, we at-tempt to estimate the relative rank that quantiﬁes how much greater or smaller the instance is than the references.
Based on the observations, we propose a novel ordi-nal regression algorithm, called moving window regression (MWR), which is illustrated in Figure 1. First, we propose the notion of relative rank (ρ-rank), which quantiﬁes the or-dinal relations among the ranks of input and reference in-stances: the ρ-rank measures how much greater the input is than the ﬁrst reference and how much smaller it is than the second one. Second, to estimate the ρ-rank, we develop a relative regressor (ρ-regressor), composed of an encoder and a regression module. Third, we propose the MWR pro-cess in Figure 1. It obtains an initial rank estimate of an in-put instance based on the nearest neighbor (NN) criterion.
Then, it reﬁnes the estimate iteratively by selecting two ref-erence instances to form a search window and estimating the ρ-rank within the search window. Here, each window is centered around the previous estimate. This is iterated until the convergence. Last, to cope with diverse characteristics in different rank groups, we develop local ρ-regressors for those groups, as well as the global ρ-regressor for the entire rank range.
This work has the following major contributions:
• We ﬁrst propose the notion of ρ-rank and design ρ-regressors for estimating ρ-ranks.
• We develop the novel MWR algorithm for accurate rank estimation, which iteratively predicts the ρ-rank within a moving search window.
• MWR provides the state-of-the-art performances on various benchmark datasets for facial age estimation and HCI classiﬁcation. Especially, for facial age esti-mation, MWR performs the best in 17 out of 19 bench-mark tests. 2.