Abstract
Despite the promising progress having been made, the two challenges of multi-view clustering (MVC) are still waiting for better solutions: i) Most existing methods are either not qualified or require additional steps for incom-plete multi-view clustering and ii) noise or outliers might significantly degrade the overall clustering performance. In this paper, we propose a novel unified framework for in-complete and complete MVC named multi-view probabilis-tic clustering (MPC). MPC equivalently transforms multi-view pairwise posterior matching probability into compo-sition of each view’s individual distribution, which toler-ates data missing and might extend to any number of views.
Then graph-context-aware refinement with path propaga-tion and co-neighbor propagation is used to refine pair-wise probability, which alleviates the impact of noise and outliers. Finally, MPC also equivalently transforms prob-abilistic clustering’s objective to avoid complete pairwise computation and adjusts clustering assignments by maxi-mizing joint probability iteratively. Extensive experiments on multiple benchmarks for incomplete and complete MVC show that MPC significantly outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods in both effectiveness and efficiency. 1.

Introduction
Multi-view clustering (MVC) [36], a task aiming at ex-ploiting both correlated and complementary information implied in multi-view data and dividing samples into var-ious clusters in an unsupervised manner, has become a hot spot in the area of computer vision, due to its superiority over single-view clustering in performance. With the ex-plosion of multi-source and multi-modal data, a great deal
∗ This work was done during research intern at Alibaba.
† Corresponding authors. of effort has been put into MVC. Co-EM [23] intends to maximize the mutual agreement across all views by learn-ing knowledge from each other. SwMC [22] constructs a unified similarity graph from multiple views and then par-tition this graph to obtain the clustering result. GMC [29] weights each data graph matrix to derive the unified graph matrix. SMSC [27] integrates anchor learning and graph construction into a unified framework. MKKM [16] seeks to optimally combine the predefined kernels with matrix-induced regularization in order to improve clustering per-formance.
Despite the progress having been made, MVC methods still face various challenges: 1) Absence of partial views among data points [17, 35] might frequently take place in practice, while existing methods are either not qualified
[27,29] or require specific additional steps [30,33] for these cases. 2) K-means [18] and spectral [25] clustering algo-rithm are commonly employed as the last step of MVC.
Both of them are sensitive to the quality of the common rep-resentations or similarity matrices, which might be signifi-cantly degraded by the noise or outliers contained in multi-view data [11, 28, 42, 43] due to the complexity in data col-lection. Moreover, the performance of K-means and spec-tral clustering relies on the selection of total cluster number which is usually unavailable in real world cases.
To address these issues, we propose a novel unified framework for incomplete and complete MVC named multi-view probabilistic clustering (MPC). Instead of learn-ing or calculating a common similarity matrix, we utilize posterior probability to directly reflect the pairwise match-ing possibility between samples. To obtain the posterior probability matrix, we mathematically decompose it into the formulas of each views’ distribution, which exhibits en-hanced tolerance to the partial missing of views and has the benefit of easily extending to any number of views.
Then, MPC performs graph-context-aware probability re-finement with path propagation and co-neighbor propaga-tion, which can effectively alleviate the impact of noise and
outliers. Finally, clusters are generated using fast proba-bilistic clustering algorithm, which is more robustness to noise and not requires the prior knowledge of cluster num-bers. To avoid complete pairwise computation, we equiv-alently transforms probabilistic clustering’s objective and adjusts clustering assignments by maximizing joint prob-ability iteratively. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
MPC significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods in both clustering performance and computational efficiency.
In summary, the main novelties of this paper are as fol-lows:
• The proposed MPC framework equivalently trans-forms the multi-view pairwise posterior matching probability into composition of each view’s individual distribution, which tolerates data missing and might extend to any number of views.
• The proposed graph-context-aware refinement effec-tively alleviates the impact of noise and outliers.
• The proposed fast probabilistic clustering algorithm cuts computational complexity by a large margin and does not require any prior knowledge. 2.