Abstract
Multi-view clustering can explore common semantics from multiple views and has attracted increasing attention.
However, existing works punish multiple objectives in the same feature space, where they ignore the conflict between learning consistent common semantics and reconstructing inconsistent view-private information. In this paper, we pro-pose a new framework of multi-level feature learning for contrastive multi-view clustering to address the aforemen-tioned issue. Our method learns different levels of features from the raw features, including low-level features, high-level features, and semantic labels/features in a fusion-free manner, so that it can effectively achieve the reconstruction objective and the consistency objectives in different feature spaces. Specifically, the reconstruction objective is con-ducted on the low-level features. Two consistency objectives based on contrastive learning are conducted on the high-level features and the semantic labels, respectively. They make the high-level features effectively explore the common semantics and the semantic labels achieve the multi-view clustering. As a result, the proposed framework can reduce the adverse influence of view-private information. Extensive experiments on public datasets demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art clustering effectiveness. 1.

Introduction
Multi-view clustering (MVC) is attracting more and more attention in recent years [22, 50, 52, 57] as multi-view data or multi-modal data can provide common semantics to improve the learning effectiveness [3, 14, 27, 33, 36, 43]. In the liter-ature, existing MVC methods can be roughly divided into two categories, i.e., traditional methods and deep methods.
The traditional MVC methods conduct the clustering task based on traditional machine learning methods and can be
†Equal contribution. ∗Corresponding author. subdivided into three subgroups, including subspace meth-ods [6, 18, 24], matrix factorization methods [45, 53, 56], and graph methods [28, 55, 60]. Many traditional MVC methods have the drawbacks such as poor representation ability and high computation complexity, resulting in limited perfor-mance in the complex scenarios with real-world data [10].
Recently, deep MVC methods have gradually become a popular trend in the community due to the outstanding representation ability [1, 2, 20, 44, 49, 50, 54]. Previous deep
MVC methods can be subdivided into two subgroups, i.e., two-stage methods and one-stage methods. Two-stage deep
MVC methods (e.g., [21, 50]) focus on separately learning the salient features from multiple views and performing the clustering task. However, Xie et al. [48] present that the clustering results can be leveraged to improve the quality of feature learning. Therefore, one-stage deep MVC methods (e.g., [39, 59]) embed the feature learning with the clustering task in a unified framework to achieve end-to-end clustering.
Multi-view data contains two kinds of information, i.e., the common semantics across all views and the view-private information for individual view. For example, a text and an image can be combined to describe common semantics, while the unrelated context in the text and the background pixels in the image are meaningless view-private information for learning common semantics. In multi-view learning, it is an always-on topic to learn common semantics and avoid the misleading of meaningless view-private information. Al-though important progress has been achieved by existing
MVC methods, they have the following drawbacks to be addressed: (1) Many MVC methods (e.g., [39, 59]) try to dis-cover the latent cluster patterns by fusing the features of all views. However, the meaningless view-private information might be dominant in the feature fusion process, compared to the common semantics, and thus interferes with the qual-ity of clustering. (2) Some MVC methods (e.g., [18, 21]) leverage the consistency objective on the latent features to explore the common semantics across all views. However, they usually need the reconstruction objective on the same
Figure 1. The framework of MFLVC. We avoid the direct feature fusion in multi-level feature learning, which learns the low-level features
Zm, the high-level features Hm, and the semantic labels Qm from the raw features Xm for each view. The reconstruction objective Lm
Z is individually conducted on Zm. Two consistency objectives (i.e., LH and LQ) are conducted on {Hm}M m=1, respectively.
Furthermore, LP is optimized to leverage the cluster information of {Hm}M m=1 to improve the clustering effectiveness of {Qm}M m=1 and {Qm}M m=1. features to avoid the trivial solution. This induces the con-flict that the consistency objective tries to learn the features with common semantics across all views as much as possible while the reconstruction objective hopes the same features to maintain the view-private information for individual view.
In this paper, we propose a new framework of multi-level feature learning for contrastive multi-view clustering (MFLVC for short) to address the aforementioned issues, as shown in Figure 1. Our goals include (1) designing a fusion-free MVC model to avoid fusing the adverse view-private in-formation among all views and (2) generating different levels of features for the samples in each view including low-level features, high-level features, and semantic labels/features.
To do this, we first leverage the autoencoder to learn the low-level features from raw features, and then obtain the high-level features and semantic labels via stacking two
MLPs on low-level features. Each MLP is shared by all views and is conducive to filtering out the view-private in-formation. Furthermore, we take the semantic labels as the anchors, which combine with the cluster information in the high-level features to improve the clustering effectiveness.
In this framework, the reconstruction objective is achieved by the low-level features while two consistency objectives are achieved by the high-level features and the semantic labels, respectively. Moreover, these two consistency objec-tives are conducted by contrastive learning, which makes the high-level features focus on mining the common semantics across all views and makes the semantic labels represent con-sistent cluster labels for multi-view clustering, respectively.
As a result, the conflict between the reconstruction objective and two consistency objectives is alleviated. Compared to previous works, our contributions are listed as follows:
• We design a fusion-free MVC method which conducts different objectives in different feature spaces to solve the conflict between the reconstruction and consistency objectives. In this way, our method is able to effectively explore the common semantics across all views and avoid their meaningless view-private information.
• We propose a flexible multi-view contrastive learn-ing framework, which can be used to simultaneously achieve the consistency objectives for the high-level fea-tures and the semantic labels. The high-level features enjoy good manifolds and represent common semantics, which enable to improve the quality of semantic labels.
• Our method is robust to the hyper-parameters’ setting due to the well-designed framework. We conduct abla-tion studies in details, including the loss components and contrastive learning structures to understand the proposed model. Extensive experiments demonstrate that it achieves state-of-the-art clustering effectiveness. 2.