Abstract
We address the problem of estimating the poses of mul-tiple instances of the source point cloud within a target point cloud. Existing solutions require sampling a lot of hypotheses to detect possible instances and reject the out-liers, whose robustness and efﬁciency degrade notably when the number of instances and outliers increase. We propose to directly group the set of noisy correspondences into dif-ferent clusters based on a distance invariance matrix. The instances and outliers are automatically identiﬁed through clustering. Our method is robust and fast. We evaluated our method on both synthetic and real-world datasets. The results show that our approach can correctly register up to 20 instances with an F1 score of 90.46% in the presence of 70% outliers, which performs signiﬁcantly better and at least 10× faster than existing methods. (Source code : https://github.com/SJTU-ViSYS/multi-instant-reg) 1.

Introduction
Three-dimensional point cloud registration [12] [48] [45] mainly focuses on estimating one single transformation be-tween the source point cloud and the target point cloud.
However, we may sometimes want to estimate multiple transformations between point clouds. For instance, we have a 3D scan of an object and may want to ﬁnd the poses of the same objects on the table within the target point cloud as shown in Figure 1. This problem, named multi-instance point cloud registration here, has been less investigated in the literature. It is non-trivial to extend existing point cloud registration methods to solve this problem.
The major challenge is to identify different clusters of corresponding points belonging to different instances within the set of noisy correspondences. One solution is to adopt a 3D object detector or apply instance segmenta-tion to the target point cloud. After that, the pose of each
*Corresponding author. This work was supported by National Science
Foundation of China (62073214). instance can be estimated by a conventional point cloud reg-istration method. However, this approach needs to train a detector or a segmentation network [39] [25] for speciﬁc ob-jects or classes, which does not apply to unknown objects or arbitrary 3D scans. Another solution is via multi-model ﬁt-ting [32] [33] [34] or [35] [29] [11]. Existing multi-model
ﬁtting methods rely on sampling valid hypotheses, which involves a large number of sampling steps when the num-ber of models or the outlier ratio becomes high, making the efﬁciency and robustness of those algorithms drop drasti-cally.
Figure 1. Multi-instance point cloud registration: Given a source point cloud of an object, multi-instance registration needs to esti-mate the pose of each object within the target point cloud.
In this paper, we propose a robust and efﬁcient solu-tion to the multi-instance 3D registration problem. The key idea is to directly group the corresponding points into dif-ferent clusters according to a distance invariance matrix.
Speciﬁcally, the matrix is constructed by checking the dis-tance consistency between each pair of correspondences af-ter the point correspondences have been obtained by fea-ture matching using descriptors like D3Feat [7], PREDA-TOR [26], or SIFT [31]. We ﬁnd that the row or column vector of this matrix has a powerful representation capa-bility that can be used for identifying the set of correspon-dences from a particular instance. We hence apply a simple and efﬁcient clustering algorithm to divide those correspon-dences into cliques. The clustering is further reﬁned by a few recursive steps involving merging similar clusters and re-assigning cluster ids to each correspondence. Finally, both the outliers and the inliers of each instance are auto-matically identiﬁed by a simple ranking strategy.
Our method is highly efﬁcient since no time-consuming hypothesis sampling is required. We have conducted exten-sive experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets.
The results show that our method is at least ten times faster than existing methods while performing signiﬁcantly bet-ter in terms of accuracy and robustness. To summary, our contributions include:
• We propose an efﬁcient and robust solution to the multi-instance point cloud registration problem, which achieves superior performance in terms of accuracy, robustness, and speed.
• We propose to use three metrics (Mean Hit Recall,
Mean Hit Precision, and Mean Hit F1) to fully evaluate the performance of multi-instance point cloud registra-tion.
• Our solution can be potentially used for zero-shot de-tection of 3D objects as our real-world tests demon-strate. 2.