Abstract
Multi-object tracking in unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) videos is an important vision task and can be applied in a wide range of applications. However, conventional multi-object trackers do not work well on UAV videos due to the challenging factors of irregular motion caused by mov-ing camera and view change in 3D directions. In this pa-per, we propose a UAVMOT network specially for multi-object tracking in UAV views. The UAVMOT introduces an ID feature update module to enhance the object’s fea-ture association. To better handle the complex motions un-der UAV views, we develop an adaptive motion ﬁlter mod-ule. In addition, a gradient balanced focal loss is used to tackle the imbalance categories and small objects detection problem. Experimental results on the VisDrone2019 and
UAVDT datasets demonstrate that the proposed UAVMOT achieves considerable improvement against the state-of-the-art tracking methods on UAV videos. 1.

Introduction
Multi-object tracking (MOT) is a fundamental task in computer vision and is widely used in numerous appli-cations [30, 33], such as autonomous driving, intelligent transportation system, and advanced video analysis. MOT methods [5, 45] typically follow the tracking by detection paradigm which includes two steps: detection and data as-sociation. The detection step generates potential box pre-dictions of the target objects in every frame while the data association step matches the predicted boxes of the same target across frames based on appearance and motion cues
[18]. Recently, multi-object tracking in UAV views has aroused the keen interest of researchers [1, 31, 39, 51] due to the convenience and dexterity of unmanned aerial vehi-cle (UAV) [9].
Despite the progress made in conventional multi-object tracking (usually tested on the videos captured in a static
† Equal contribution, ∗ corresponding author
Imbalanced  categories
View  change
Irregular  motion 
Detection 
Data Association 
Figure 1. Challenges of MOT on UAV videos. Detection stage: the categories of objects in UAV videos are imbalanced and most of the targets under a UAV view are small. Data association stage: appearance and motion of objects change irregularly and rapidly due to the moving of the UAV camera. view), multi-object tracking under the moving UAV views is still challenging. As illustrated in Fig. 1, there are two criti-cal problems need to be solved urgently in the detection and data association stages. In the detection stage, there are usu-ally multiple categories of objects in a moving UAV view and the object numbers of each category are extremely im-balanced, which makes the training of the detection model difﬁcult. In addition, most of the objects in UAV videos are small due to the high altitude of UAV, which further aggra-vates the difﬁculty of the detection task. In the data asso-ciation stage, the challenge lies in the inconsistent appear-ance and motion information of the target objects which is caused by irregular and fast camera motion and usually re-sults in ID switches. The object motion in UAV videos is a superposition of object movements and the motion of UAV which is irregular and hard to be modelled by the traditional
Kalman ﬁlter.
In this paper, we propose a novel multi-object tracker, named UAVMOT network, for multi-object tracking on moving UAV videos. To enhance ID embedding features of objects, we construct an ID feature update (IDFU) mod-ule, where the correlation technology [12] is used to rele-vant adjacent frame features and the ID embedding features would be updated with the UAV views changing. To tackle the issues caused by UAV motions, we develop an adap-tive motion ﬁlter (AMF), where an motion mode is used to judge the UAV motion mode and applies different tracking strategies according to the motion mode. Particularly, a lo-cal relation ﬁlter is specially designed to handle the irregular motions of UAV, which grasps the invariant characteristics that do not change with the UAV moving. Furthermore, to alleviate the issues of imbalanced categories classiﬁcation and small-scale objects detection, we propose a gradient balanced focal (GBF) loss to supervise the heatmaps learn-ing. The GBF loss combines the equalization loss [29] to balance the imbalanced categories and enhances the small-scale objects detection ability.
We conduct experiments on two public benchmark datasets, i.e., VisDrone2019 dataset [52] and UAVDT dataset [13] to evaluate the proposed algorithm. The ex-perimental results demonstrate that the proposed UAVMOT can accurately track multiple objects in the view of UAV.
The key motivation of this work is that a novel multi-object tracker is speciﬁcally designed for UAVs. It fully considers the object characteristics in UAV video perspectives, and makes corresponding improvements for multi-object track-ing task. The main contributions of this article are summa-rized as follows:
• We propose an ID feature update module to enhance object ID embedding features, which could update ID features adaptively with UAV changing views.
• We develop an adaptive motion ﬁlter for complex mo-tion tracking of objects in UAV videos, which adap-tively switches motion ﬁlters to adapt to the movement of UAV.
• We design a novel gradient balanced focal loss to su-pervise the learning of objects’ heatmaps, which not only considers the imbalanced categories but also fo-cuses on the small-scale objects in UAV videos. 2.