Abstract
In this paper, we study Multiscale Vision Transformers (MViTv2) as a unified architecture for image and video classification, as well as object detection. We present an improved version of MViT that incorporates decomposed relative positional embeddings and residual pooling con-nections. We instantiate this architecture in five sizes and evaluate it for ImageNet classification, COCO detection and Kinetics video recognition where it outperforms prior work. We further compare MViTv2s’ pooling attention to window attention mechanisms where it outperforms the latter in accuracy/compute. Without bells-and-whistles, MViTv2 has state-of-the-art performance in 3 domains: 88.8% ac-curacy on ImageNet classification, 58.7 APbox on COCO object detection as well as 86.1% on Kinetics-400 video classification. Code and models are available at https:
//github.com/facebookresearch/mvit. 1.

Introduction
Designing architectures for different visual recognition tasks has been historically difficult and the most widely adopted ones have been the ones that combine simplicity and efficacy, e.g. VGGNet [67] and ResNet [37]. More recently Vision Transformers (ViT) [17] have shown promis-ing performance and are rivaling convolutional neural net-works (CNN) and a wide range of modifications have re-cently been proposed to apply them to different vision tasks [1, 2, 21, 55, 68, 73, 78, 90].
While ViT [17] is popular in image classification, its usage for high-resolution object detection and space-time video understanding tasks remains challenging. The den-sity of visual signals poses severe challenges in compute and memory requirements as these scale quadratically in complexity within the self-attention blocks of Transformer-based [76] models. The community has approached this burden with different strategies: Two popular ones are (1) local attention computation within a window [55] for object detection and (2) pooling attention that locally aggregates features before computing self-attention in video tasks [21]. (a) Image classification (b) Object detection (c) Video recognition
Figure 1. Our MViTv2 is a multiscale transformer with state-of-the-art performance across three visual recognition tasks.
The latter fuels Multiscale Vision Transformers (MViT) [21], an architecture that extends ViT in a simple way: instead of having a fixed resolution throughout the net-work, it has a feature hierarchy with multiple stages starting from high-resolution to low-resolution. MViT is designed for video tasks where it has state-of-the-art performance.
In this paper, we develop two simple technical improve-ments to further increase its performance and study MViT as a single model family for visual recognition across 3 tasks: image classification, object detection and video classifica-tion, in order to understand if it can serve as a general vision backbone for spatial as well as spatiotemporal recognition tasks (see Fig. 1). Our empirical study leads to an improved architecture (MViTv2) and encompasses the following: (i) We create strong baselines that improve pooling at-tention along two axes: (a) shift-invariant positional embed-dings using decomposed location distances to inject position information in Transformer blocks; (b) a residual pooling connection to compensate the effect of pooling strides in attention computation. Our simple-yet-effective upgrades lead to significantly better results. (ii) Using the improved structure of MViT, we employ a standard dense prediction framework: Mask R-CNN [36] with Feature Pyramid Networks (FPN) [53] and apply it to object detection and instance segmentation.
We study if MViT can process high-resolution visual input by using pooling attention to overcome the compu-tation and memory cost involved. Our experiments sug-gest that pooling attention is more effective than local win-dow attention mechanisms (e.g. Swin [55]). We further develop a simple-yet-effective Hybrid window attention scheme that can complement pooling attention for better accuracy/compute tradeoff. (iii) We instantiate our architecture in five sizes of in-creasing complexity (width, depth, resolution) and report a practical training recipe for large multiscale transformers.
The MViT variants are applied to image classification, object detection and video classification, with minimal modifica-tion, to study its purpose as a generic vision architecture.
Experiments reveal that our MViTv2 achieves 88.8% accuracy for ImageNet-1K classification, with pretrain-ing on ImageNet-21K (and 86.3% without), as well as 58.7 APbox on COCO object detection using only Cas-cade Mask R-CNN [6]. For video classification tasks,
MViT achieves unprecedented accuracies of 86.1% on
Kinetics-400, 87.9% on Kinetics-600, 79.4% on Kinetics-700, and 73.3% on Something-Something-v2. Our video code will be open-sourced in PyTorchVideo 1,2 [19, 20]. 2.