Abstract
In this paper, we propose Neural Points, a novel point cloud representation and apply it to the arbitrary-factored upsampling task. Different from traditional point cloud representation where each point only represents a posi-tion or a local plane in the 3D space, each point in Neu-ral Points represents a local continuous geometric shape via neural fields. Therefore, Neural Points contain more shape information and thus have a stronger representa-tion ability. Neural Points is trained with surface con-taining rich geometric details, such that the trained model has enough expression ability for various shapes. Specifi-cally, we extract deep local features on the points and con-struct neural fields through the local isomorphism between the 2D parametric domain and the 3D local patch. In the final, local neural fields are integrated together to form the global surface. Experimental results show that Neu-ral Points has powerful representation ability and demon-strate excellent robustness and generalization ability. With
Neural Points, we can resample point cloud with arbi-trary resolutions, and it outperforms the state-of-the-art point cloud upsampling methods. Code is available at https://github.com/WanquanF/NeuralPoints. 1.

Introduction
Point cloud, which is the most fundamental and popu-lar representation of 3D scenes, has been widely used in many applications like 3D reconstruction [11, 14, 24, 33], virtual/augmented reality [10, 34] and autonomous driv-ing [16, 36]. In the traditional representation of point cloud, each point only represents a position in the 3D space, and it can be further extended to represent a local plane if its nor-mal vector is assigned. Therefore, the representation ability of point cloud is still limited by its resolution. Although point cloud upsampling methods [17, 18, 38, 43] have been proposed to improve its representation ability, their strategy is still a “discrete-to-discrete” manner and can not overcome the limitation of current point cloud representation.
In this work, we propose Neural Points, a novel point
*Corresponding author cloud representation, which significantly improves the rep-resentation ability and can be naturally applied to the up-sampling task. Different from traditional representation, each point of Neural Points encodes a local surface patch represented via neural fields. Specifically, each point-wise surface patch is represented as a local isomorphism between the 2D parametric domain and the 3D local surface patch, and the isomorphism is implicitly represented via neural fields. Thanks to its continuous nature, free of the limita-tion of finite resolution, powerful representation ability to involve more shape information, neural fields enable Neu-ral Points several advantages over traditional discrete point cloud representation. Meanwhile, the trained model of neu-ral fields is shared for all local patches, and thus the storage overhead of Neural Points is quite small.
Unlike some existing methods which represent the whole surface model via one neural field [26, 41], both the neural fields and the point features passed into Neural Points are all local. With this design, our Neural Points representation shows several advantages including excellent ability to ex-press details, strong generalization ability, and low need for training data. Specifically, we employ local neural fields to construct the continuous bijective mapping between the 2D parametric domain and the 3D local surface patch, based on the fact that 3D local patch on the 2D manifold is isomor-phic to a 2D simply connected disk. With the neural field, each 3D local patch can be viewed as a parametric surface defined in a 2D parametric domain. To this end, we employ an encoder to extract point-wise local features and take the local feature as a part of the input passed into the neural field network. With the local shape information, the neural field can represent the surface patch well, and the trained net-work model is shared by all local patches of all 3D models.
In the final, we design an integration strategy to integrate all the local neural fields together to form the final global shape. The model of Neural Points is trained with geomet-ric surface in high resolution with rich geometric details, such that the trained Neural Points model can represent rich geometric shapes.
As for the point cloud upsampling task, its target is to predict the upsampled point cloud with higher reso-lution from the given low-resolution input such that it can better capture the geometric features of the underly-ing continuous surface. Existing point upsampling meth-ods [17,18,21,32,38,42–44] usually employ a “discrete-to-discrete” manner. Dissimilarly, we convert the input point cloud representation to continuous Neural Points, and then apply arbitrary-factored sampling.
The experimental results show that Neural Points can produce high-quality continuous surfaces and overcome the limitation of point resolution well. For the upsampling task, our strategy outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.
In summary, the contributions of this work include:
• We propose Neural Points, a novel point cloud repre-sentation that can be naturally applied to the upsam-pling task, with low storage overhead.
• We employ the neural implicit functions along with the deep local features of surface patches to represent the local neural fields, and design an integration strategy to form the final global shape.
• Evaluation results demonstrate that the Neural Points representation has excellent robustness and generaliza-tion ability for various inputs on the upsampling task. 2.