Abstract
This paper proposes the inertial localization problem, the task of estimating the absolute location from a sequence of inertial sensor measurements. This is an exciting and unexplored area of indoor localization research, where we present a rich dataset with 53 hours of inertial sensor data and the associated ground truth locations. We developed a solution, dubbed neural inertial localization (NILoc) which 1) uses a neural inertial navigation technique to turn inertial sensor history to a sequence of velocity vectors; then 2) employs a transformer-based neural architecture to find the device location from the sequence of velocities.
We only use an IMU sensor, which is energy efficient and privacy preserving compared to WiFi, cameras, and other data sources. Our approach is significantly faster and achieves competitive results even compared with state-of-the-art methods that require a floorplan and run 20 to 30 times slower. We share our code, model and data at https://sachini.github.io/niloc. 1.

Introduction
Imagine one stands up, walks for 3 meters, turns right, and opens a door in an office. This information might be sufficient to identify the location of the individual. A recent
*Corresponding author sherath@sfu.ca. (This work was partially done when Sachini was an intern at Meta.) breakthrough in inertial navigation [10, 14, 22] allows us to obtain such motion history using an inertial measurement unit (IMU). What is missing is the technology that maps a motion history to a location. This papers addresses this gap, seeking to open a new paradigm in the localization research, named “inertial localization”, whose task is to infer the location from a sequence of IMU sensor data.
Indoor localization is a crucial technology for location-aware services, such as mobile business applications for consumers, entertainment (e.g., Pokemon Go) for casual users, and industry verticals for professional operators (e.g., maintenance at a factory). State-of-the-art indoor localization systems [5] mostly rely on WiFi, whose infrastructure is ubiquitous thanks to the demands on
Internet of Things (IoT). Nevertheless, accuracy of WiFi based localization depends on infrastructure (i.e number of access points) thus cannot scale easily to non-commercial private spaces.
IMU is a powerful complementary modality to WiFi, which has proven effective for the navigation task recently [10,14,22]. IMU 1) works anytime anywhere (e.g., inside a pocket/bag/hand); 2) is energy efficient to be an always-on sensor and 3) protects the privacy of bystanders. localization problem as a task of estimating the location from a history of IMU measurements. The paper provides the first inertial localization benchmark, consisting of 53 hours of motion data and ground-truth locations over 3 buildings. The introduces a novel
This paper inertial
paper also proposes an effective solution to the problem, dubbed neural inertial localization (NILoc). NILoc first uses a neural inertial navigation technique [10] to turn IMU sensor data into a sequence of velocity vectors, where the remaining task is to map a velocity sequence to a location.
The high uncertainty in this remaining task is the challenge of inertial localization. For instance, a stationary motion can be anywhere, and a short forward motion can be at any corridor. To overcome the uncertainty, our approach employs a Transformer-based neural architecture [27] (capable of encoding complex long sequential data) with a Temporal Convolutional Network (further expanding the temporal capacity by compressing the input sequence length) and an auto-regressive decoder (handling arbitrarily long sequential data).
The contributions of the paper are 3-fold: 1) a novel inertial localization problem, 2) a new inertial localization benchmark, and 3) an effective neural inertial localization algorithm. We will share our code, models and data. 2.