Abstract
In computer-aided design (CAD) systems, 2D line draw-ings are commonly used to illustrate 3D object designs.
To reconstruct the 3D models depicted by a single 2D line drawing, an important key is ﬁnding the edge loops in the line drawing which correspond to the actual faces of the 3D object. In this paper, we approach the classical prob-lem of face identiﬁcation from a novel data-driven point of view. We cast it as a sequence generation problem: starting from an arbitrary edge, we adopt a variant of the popular Transformer model to predict the edges associated with the same face in a natural order. This allows us to avoid searching the space of all possible edge loops with various hand-crafted rules and heuristics as most existing methods do, deal with challenging cases such as curved surfaces and nested edge loops, and leverage additional cues such as face types. We further discuss how possi-bly imperfect predictions can be used for 3D object recon-struction. The project page is at https://manycore-research.github.io/faceformer. 1.

Introduction
In this paper, we revisit a classical problem in computer-aided design (CAD), namely the conversion of 2D line drawings into 3D objects. In a traditional CAD pipeline, design engineers commonly draw a 2D wireframe1 of the desired object when creating their ideas and when commu-nicating their ideas to others. Therefore, there is a strong need to develop algorithms which can convert 2D line draw-ings into 3D solid models for analysis, simulation, and man-ufacturing.
An important step of 3D reconstruction from 2D line drawings is face identiﬁcation, that is, ﬁnding loops of the edges which correspond to faces of the 3D object (Figure 1).
If the correct face conﬁguration of an object can be ob-tained, the number of degrees of freedom in its reconstruc-tion will be greatly reduced. Many studies have been per-∗Work done during an internship at Manycore Tech Inc. 1We use the terms “wireframe” and “line drawing” interchangeably.
Figure 1. Given a 2D line drawing, face identiﬁcation aims to
ﬁnd edge loops which correspond to actual faces of the 3D object.
First row: A case where several faces (including the one indicated by a red arrow) are enclosed by two or more loops. Second row:
A case where multiple topologically correct interpretations exist. formed to achieve this goal, and in certain cases, a satisfac-tory solution exists. For example, it is well known that there is a unique planar embedding when the object has genus 0 and the drawing is 3-connected, from which the set of faces can be determined [24]. However, for a general manifold object with complex geometry (e.g., curved surfaces) and topology (e.g., high genus), the task remains difﬁcult.
A close look at current methods reveals two primary sources of challenges. The ﬁrst one is the algorithmic com-plexity. As no analytical solution is available for a general manifold object, these methods need to search through the space of all possible face loops, which grows exponentially with the number of vertices.
In order to make the solu-tion efﬁcient, much effort has been made to design heuristic search algorithms [7, 18, 19, 27]. The second one is the inherent ambiguity in reconstructing 3D objects from 2D projections. For example, it is impossible for a topological algorithm to tell if two nested cycles (Figure 1, ﬁrst row) are coplanar, thus are two loops of the same face. Besides, a single 2D projection may yield multiple topologically cor-rect solutions (Figure 1, second row).
In such cases, ad-ditional heuristics (e.g., number of cycles, regularities) or
human intervention is required to choose the ﬁnal output.
Nevertheless, humans can effortlessly “see” the real faces in a typical line drawing, including those in Figure 1.
Rather than performing a tedious search for the face loops, our ability to quickly identify the faces seems to be at-tributed to our past experience interacting with 3D objects.
This makes us wonder: Is it possible for a computer to learn to recognize faces in a data-driven fashion? This work rep-resents a ﬁrst attempt to answer the question. We train a deep neural network to detect faces using a large collec-tion of 3D objects and their 2D projections. This way, we are able to avoid exploring a search space of exponential order. Moreover, by learning from ground truth 3D data, our method implicitly learns to generate the most plausible solutions, resolving the inherent ambiguity associated with the problem.
To this end, we cast face identiﬁcation as a sequence gen-eration problem, leveraging the natural order of co-edges in a face loop (see Section 3 for details). Given a set of co-edges in a 2D line drawing, we train a variant of the popular
Transformer model [28] to predict one co-edge index that forms the face at one timestamp. For each detected face, we further classify it into different types such as planes and cylindrical surfaces. On the public ABC dataset [15], our model achieves 93.8% and 95.9% in precision and recall, respectively. Finally, with the detected faces, we develop a simple convex optimization scheme to reconstruct struc-tured 3D models from a single 2D line drawing.
In summary, the main contributions of this work are two-fold: (i) We propose a ﬁrst data-driven approach to face identiﬁcation and study its advantages and disadvan-tages over existing geometry- and topology-based methods. (ii) We develop a simple scheme to reconstruct a 3D model from a single 2D line drawing using the face identiﬁca-tion results. With this work, we discuss new opportuni-ties for incorporating learning-based approaches into estab-lished CAD pipelines, such as identifying conﬂicting face loops in a geometric constraint system for 3D modeling. 2.