Abstract
Dashed curve is a frequently used curve form and is widely used in various drawing and illustration applica-tions. While humans can intuitively recognize dashed curves from disjoint curve segments based on the law of continuity in Gestalt psychology, it is extremely difﬁcult for computers to model the Gestalt law of continuity and recognize the dashed curves since high-level semantic un-derstanding is needed for this task. The various appear-ances and styles of the dashed curves posed on a potentially noisy background further complicate the task. In this paper, we propose an innovative Transformer-based framework to recognize dashed curves based on both high-level features and low-level clues. The framework manages to learn the computational analogy of the Gestalt Law in various do-mains to locate and extract instances of dashed curves in both raster and vector representations. Qualitative and quantitative evaluations demonstrate the efﬁciency and ro-bustness of our framework over all existing solutions. 1.

Introduction
Dashed curve is a frequently used curve form, where the curve is made up of a series of disjoint but continuous curve segments. Dashed curves are widely used in vari-ous drawing and illustration applications, such as technical line drawings, graphic designs, fashion designs, paper fold-ing illustrations, etc. While humans can intuitively recog-nize dashed curves though they are broken into disjoint seg-ments, it is extremely difﬁcult for computers to recognize the broken segments as one semantic curve as high-level semantic understanding is needed for this recognition task.
There are three major challenges. Firstly, different dashed curves may be composed of solid curve segments in differ-ent lengths, widths, and composition patterns, as shown in
Fig. 1a. Secondly, multiple dashed curves might intersect with each other, which complicates recognition of individ-ual dashed curves. Thirdly, the background of the drawings
*Corresponding author. (a) Input (b) [13] (c) [7] (d) Ours (e) Input (f) [39] (g) Ours
Figure 1. Dashed curve recognition results. and illustrations might be noisy due to the quality loss in the scanning or photo capturing process, which will further make the identiﬁcation of the curve segments non-trivial, especially when the curve segments are of short lengths.
In order to recognize dashed curves from illustrations or graphic designs, several traditional methods have been pro-posed based on manually designed heuristics [1, 10, 18, 24].
Due to the limitation of human-designed heuristics, these methods are generally restricted to solve only dashed curves of relatively simple and pre-deﬁned shapes and styles and easily get failed when the input becomes complex, as shown in Fig. 1b. A workshop was held in 1995 to encourage re-search efforts in solving this challenging problem [30]. Un-fortunately, it did not gain much success at that time due to the limitations of traditional heuristic methods. Later, methods have been proposed in detecting lines for 3D point
clouds, which share some similarities as the dashed curve recognition task. However, these methods are still based on heuristics and make assumptions on the appearance of the points. Directly applying these methods on dashed illustra-tions containing dashed curves of different curve styles can-not obtain satisfying results, as shown in Fig. 1c. Recently, deep learning based approaches [27,39] have been proposed in line drawing vectorization and contour detection in nat-ural photographs, but these methods still cannot be directly applied in our task, even if the models are re-trained with dashed illustrations, as shown in Fig. 1f.
We point out that either low-level clues or high-level fea-tures alone cannot achieve satisfying dashed curve recog-nition results. With low-level clues only, such as tangent directions, the computer may easily get confused at junc-tions or complicated regions. On the other hand, high-level features are too rough to recognize each individual curve, especially when the curves are broken into disjoint short curve segments. Therefore, in this paper, we proposed an innovative approach that combines high-level features and low-level clues to recognize the dash curves and output the precise raster and vector forms of the curves via a learning-based approach.
Our method is designed based on the idea of Gestalt psy-chology, which suggests that humans can recognize dashed curves from broken curve segments based on the law of con-tinuity [38]. This inspires us to ﬁrst construct a high-level understanding of the dashed curves and then use this un-derstanding to facilitate the extraction and vectorization of the curves. In particular, we propose to learn the Gestalt law of continuity of a dashed drawing using a deep neural network. This network will aggregate the curve segments into a list of curve descriptors, which contain the high-level embedding of the dashed curves. However, the aggregated curve descriptors only contain high-level rough curve rep-resentations, which cannot be directly visualized. We fur-ther propose another deep learning network to construct the pixel-level dashed curves from the high-level curve descrip-tors. These pixel-level dashed curves are raster representa-tions and still lack the notion of continuity. So, we pro-pose the third deep learning network to predict the analytic form of the recognized dashed curves. The three networks are trained together to enable end-to-end training and error propagation. Our method can be applied on dashed illustra-tions that contain dashed curves of different widths, lengths, shapes, and styles. Satisfying results are obtained in all ex-periments.
The major contributions of our framework can be con-cluded as follows:
• We propose an end-to-end framework that can recog-nize and extract dashed curves based on their semantic meaning with high accuracy and robustness.
• We learn to apply the Gestalt law of grouping and con-tinuity as an explicit constraint in our framework.
• We conduct the learning of the Gestalt law in the fea-ture, raster, and vector domain simultaneously with specially crafted supervision. 2.