Abstract 1.

Introduction
Despite the advent in rendering, editing and prepro-cessing methods of 3D meshes, their real-time execution remains still infeasible for large-scale meshes. To ease and accelerate such processes, mesh simplification meth-ods have been introduced with the aim to reduce the mesh resolution while preserving its appearance. In this work we attempt to tackle the novel task of learnable and differen-tiable mesh simplification. Compared to traditional simpli-fication approaches that collapse edges in a greedy itera-tive manner, we propose a fast and scalable method that simplifies a given mesh in one-pass. The proposed method unfolds in three steps. Initially, a subset of the input ver-tices is sampled using a sophisticated extension of random sampling. Then, we train a sparse attention network to pro-pose candidate triangles based on the edge connectivity of the sampled vertices. Finally, a classification network es-timates the probability that a candidate triangle will be in-cluded in the final mesh. The fast, lightweight and differen-tiable properties of the proposed method makes it possible to be plugged in every learnable pipeline without introduc-ing a significant overhead. We evaluate both the sampled vertices and the generated triangles under several appear-ance error measures and compare its performance against several state-of-the-art baselines. Furthermore, we show-case that the running performance can be up to 10× faster than traditional methods.
Triangle meshes remain the most popular 3D structure to represent a surface. The advent of 3D scanning devices have made feasible to collect highly detailed 3D meshes that typically hold thousand of faces. However, extreme details lead to enormous memory requirements that limit their usage. A wide range of applications including render-ing and editing along with their mobile implementations, require lightweight meshes to enable real-time processing.
Additionally, many monocular 3D reconstruction methods that utilize analysis-by-synthesis are required to be compu-tational efficient and differentiable in terms of their topolo-gies. These types of iterative optimization methods can drastically benefit from an differentiable on-the-fly simpli-fication technique that reduce their computational footprint.
Mesh simplification is a long studied problem, with an immense amount of methods developed to sustainably re-duce the size of the original mesh without extremely dis-torting its appearance. Traditional simplification techniques decimate the input mesh in a greedy-fashion by prioritiz-ing vertices and edges according to a cost function [10, 34].
However, in large-scale objects scenario, simplifying over 90% of the original mesh size requires iterating through thousands of vertices resulting in an inevitable computa-tional burden. In addition to their computational footprint, traditional simplification techniques are non-differentiable and thus can not be used directly in end-to-end training processes that optimize the mesh surface. To alleviate the aforementioned limitations we propose a learnable strategy
for mesh simplification that reduces both time and compu-tational requirements and provides a plug-and-play method, ready to be adapted in any differentiable framework.
A major barrier that limits learnable simplification meth-ods is the discrete nature of the mesh connectivity, i.e. edges and triangles. Although mesh simplification can be achieved in a two-step process using a learnable sampling method followed by an off-the-shelf triangulation algorithm (e.g. Delaunay or Ball Pivoting) [28], such setting, apart from being time consuming, limits the direct optimization of the mesh surface. Recently, several approaches have been proposed to solve the non-trival task of differential triangu-lation using soft relaxations of the discrete setting. How-ever, most of them are considered impractical since they are applied to volumetric representations [5], demand iterative optimizations for the triangulation for each mesh [37] or re-quire 2D parametrizations [30, 31]. Our aim is to utilize a simple but intuitive differentiable process to directly trian-gulate the 3D points in one-pass. To do so, we model the triangulation process by generating a distribution over pos-sible edges and triangles and select the ones that preserve the appearance of the original mesh.
In this study we propose the first learnable mesh simpli-fication method that generates both points and triangulation of the simplified mesh. In contrast to previous studies [28], we propose soft relaxation of the discrete triangulation set-ting by learning the mesh connectivity distribution in an unsupervised manner. The proposed method can simplify meshes of any scale in real-time by using an extremely effi-cient point sampling method and a lightweight triangle clas-sifier. To follow the initial mesh appearance, we constrain the distribution of the edges to the priors defined by the original mesh connectivity. The proposed method is fully-differentiable and can be adapted to any training procedure without a significant computational footprint. Finally, the proposed method can generalize to out-of-distribution sam-ples exhibiting zero-shot capabilities.
The main contributions of this work are summarized as:
• We propose the first, to the best of our knowledge, learnable mesh simplification framework that is trained to both select vertices and generate the underlining tri-angulation of the surface.
• The proposed model is fully differentiable and can be directly adapted to any learnable framework.
• We introduce an efficient point selection method that extends the naive random sampling [15] to a train-able module that samples vertices from the underlying multinomial distribution.
• Finally, we showcase a simple but intuitive triangula-tion strategy that can be adapted to point cloud mesh-ing. 2.