Abstract
Neural implicit representations have recently shown en-couraging results in various domains, including promis-ing progress in simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM). Nevertheless, existing methods produce over-smoothed scene reconstructions and have difficulty scaling up to large scenes. These limitations are mainly due to their simple fully-connected network architecture that does not incorporate local information in the observations. In this paper, we present NICE-SLAM, a dense SLAM system that incorporates multi-level local information by introducing a hierarchical scene representation. Optimizing this rep-resentation with pre-trained geometric priors enables de-tailed reconstruction on large indoor scenes. Compared to recent neural implicit SLAM systems, our approach is more scalable, efficient, and robust. Experiments on five chal-lenging datasets demonstrate competitive results of NICE-SLAM in both mapping and tracking quality. Project page: https:// pengsongyou.github.io/ nice-slam. 1.

Introduction
Dense visual Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) is a fundamental problem in 3D computer vi-sion with many applications in autonomous driving, indoor robotics, mixed reality, etc. In order to make a SLAM sys-tem truly useful for real-world applications, the following properties are essential. First, we desire the SLAM system to be real-time. Next, the system should have the ability to make reasonable predictions for regions without obser-vations. Moreover, the system should be able to scale up to large scenes. Last but not least, it is crucial to be robust to noisy or missing observations.
In the scope of real-time dense visual SLAM system, many methods have been introduced for RGB-D cameras in the past years. Traditional dense visual SLAM systems [29,
*Equal contribution.
†Corresponding author.
Figure 1. Multi-room Apartment 3D Reconstruction using
NICE-SLAM. A hierarchical feature grid jointly encodes geome-try and color information and is used for both mapping and track-ing. We depict the final mesh and camera tracking trajectory. 41, 58, 59] fulfil the real-time requirement and can be used in large-scale scenes, but they are unable to make plausible geometry estimation for unobserved regions. On the other hand, learning-based SLAM approaches [3,12,47,67] attain a certain level of predictive power since they typically train on task-specific datasets. Moreover, learning-based meth-ods tend to better deal with noises and outliers. However, these methods are typically only working in small scenes with multiple objects. Recently, Sucar et al. [46] applied a neural implicit representation in the real-time dense SLAM system (called iMAP), and they showed decent tracking and mapping results for room-sized datasets. Nevertheless, when scaling up to larger scenes, e.g., an apartment con-sisting of multiple rooms, significant performance drops are observed in both the dense reconstruction and camera track-ing accuracy.
The key limiting factor of iMAP [46] stems from its use of a single multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to represent the entire scene, which can only be updated globally with every new, potentially partial RGB-D observations. In contrast, recent works [37, 48] demonstrate that establishing multi-level grid-based features can help to preserve geometric de-tails and enable reconstructing complex scenes, but these are offline methods without real-time capability.
In this work, we seek to combine the strengths of hier-archical scene representations with those of neural implicit representations for the task of dense RGB-D SLAM. To this end, we introduce NICE-SLAM, a dense RGB-D SLAM system that can be applied to large-scale scenes while pre-serving the predictive ability. Our key idea is to represent the scene geometry and appearance with hierarchical fea-ture grids and incorporate the inductive biases of neural implicit decoders pretrained at different spatial resolutions.
With the rendered depth and color images from the occu-pancy and color decoder outputs, we can optimize the fea-tures grids only within the viewing frustum by minimizing the re-rendering losses. We perform extensive evaluations on a wide variety of indoor RGB-D sequences and demon-strate the scalability and predictive ability of our method.
Overall, we make the following contributions:
• We present NICE-SLAM, a dense RGB-D SLAM system that is real-time capable, scalable, predictive, and robust to various challenging scenarios.
• The core of NICE-SLAM is a hierarchical, grid-based neural implicit encoding.
In contrast to global neural scene encodings, this representation allows for local up-dates, which is a prerequisite for large-scale approaches.
• We conduct extensive evaluations on various datasets which demonstrate competitive performance in both map-ping and tracking.
The code is available at https://github.com/cvg/nice-slam. 2.