Abstract
Current instance segmentation methods rely heavily on pixel-level annotated images. The huge cost to obtain such fully-annotated images restricts the dataset scale and limits the performance. In this paper, we formally address semi-supervised instance segmentation, where unlabeled images are employed to boost the performance. We construct a framework for semi-supervised instance segmentation by assigning pixel-level pseudo labels. Under this framework, we point out that noisy boundaries associated with pseudo labels are double-edged. We propose to exploit and re-sist them in a unified manner simultaneously: 1) To com-bat the negative effects of noisy boundaries, we propose a noise-tolerant mask head by leveraging low-resolution fea-tures. 2) To enhance the positive impacts, we introduce a boundary-preserving map for learning detailed informa-tion within boundary-relevant regions. We evaluate our ap-proach by extensive experiments. It behaves extraordinar-ily, outperforming the supervised baseline by a large mar-gin, more than 6% on Cityscapes, 7% on COCO and 4.5% on BDD100k. On Cityscapes, our method achieves com-parable performance by utilizing only 30% labeled images. 1.

Introduction
“When life gives you lemons, make lemonade.” – Elbert Hubbard
The performance of instance segmentation has been im-proved significantly with the development of deep learning
[19, 24, 5, 50, 52]. However, current instance segmenta-tion methods require pixel-level labeled images for fully-supervised training, which are prohibitively expensive to annotate. Statistically, segmenting one object instance re-quires 79s on average [36]. In some cases, annotating a sin-gle image with high quality even costs more than 1.5h [16].
*Corresponding author
Codes are available at https://github.com/zhenyuw16/noisyboundaries.
Figure 1: Semi-supervised instance segmentation (on the
COCO dataset), which explores to utilize unlabeled images, is a novel problem that has not been formally defined and addressed so far. Compared with weakly-supervised and fully-supervised methods, it excavates existing data suffi-ciently and seeks to use a large number of unlabeled re-sources, making instance segmentation more practical.
This severely restricts the scale of datasets and further lim-its the performance of models. Researches in cognition sci-ence [18, 31] have demonstrated that human concept learn-ing involves large amounts of unlabeled experience with-out feedback. Works in object detection [47, 25, 38] or semantic segmentation [41, 39, 21] have seeked for semi-supervised learning to alleviate the huge expense of human labeling. However, utilizing nearly labor-free unlabeled im-ages is still unexplored for instance segmentation, partially because of its intrinsic difficulty. These motivate us to use unlabeled images to break through the upper bound of fully-supervised instance segmentation. We call this task semi-supervised instance segmentation.
The difficulty to collect pixel-level annotated data in in-stance segmentation has been recognized by many works.
Most of them attempt to deal with this problem by weakly-supervised instance segmentation [22, 51, 45]. The main benefit of semi-supervised instance segmentation, com-pared to fully-supervised and weakly-supervised ones, is
that it exploits existing resources sufficiently and allows to pursue larger-scale learning. Pixel-level annotated images have been provided in several existing datasets [36, 16, 56].
Semi-supervised instance segmentation can utilize these data, which are necessary for high-quality segmentation masks. Unlabeled images are enormous, and obtaining them is easy. As a result, the scale of learning is not re-stricted by datasets and can be as large as possible. This endows semi-supervised instance segmentation the poten-tial to achieve better performance continuously.
Stimulated by the importance of semi-supervised in-stance segmentation, it is natural to ask: what’s the core is-sue of semi-supervised instance segmentation? The core is to excavate information within unlabeled data. Progress in fully-supervised or weakly-supervised methods cannot be applied to the semi-supervised task, as supervision clues are necessary for them. To tackle this issue, we adopt the idea of pseudo labels and propose a semi-supervised instance segmentation framework. With this framework, the noise, especially included in masks from pseudo labels, is essen-tial for the effective exploitation of unlabeled images. Con-sidering that a high proportion of pixel-level noise lies in boundary regions, we focus on noisy boundaries. They pro-vide incorrect supervision signals, but also contain many details that contribute to the model performance. This con-tradiction makes noisy boundaries a challenging problem.
In a word, noisy boundaries are double-edged (both
“lemon” and “lemonade”), including useful and harmful in-formation together. How to learn from noisy boundaries for semi-supervised instance segmentation? We need to exploit and combat them jointly. Specifically, we propose a noise-tolerant mask head (NTM) and a boundary-preserving map (BPM). Our NTM introduces a mask prediction branch for low-resolution segmentation output. With a low-resolution ground-truth for supervision, the details from boundaries are eliminated, where most of the noise exists. This con-tributes to noise-resistant learning. Meanwhile, our pro-posed BPM facilitates boundary learning. Different from previous approaches which preserve boundaries at the cost of enlarging pixel-level noise, our BPM strongly corre-sponds with the boundary regions but is irrelevant to noise.
This leads to more precise results. With the help of our
NTM and BPM, our method benefits from valuable features within noisy boundaries and discards the detrimental ones, thus mining unlabeled information more effectively.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We formally address the semi-supervised instance seg-mentation task and construct a framework to exploit unlabeled data, which empowers us ability to break through the fully-supervised upper bound.
• We demonstrate the negative correlation between mask resolution and pixel-level noise, then propose a noise-tolerant head by interweaving low and high resolution features, which can resist noise in boundary regions.
• We propose a boundary-preserving map, which en-riches boundary-relevant regions and suppresses nar-row noise-excessive regions simultaneously. This pro-duces more accurate segmentation boundaries.
Extensive experiments on Cityscapes [16], COCO [36] and BDD100K [56] demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.
It obtains comparable results with only 30% amount of labeled images and surpasses its fully-supervised counterpart with only 40% labeled data. The performance is even better than approaches using human-annotated coarse labels or extra box-level annotations. We provide a simple and effective framework, which we believe will facilitate future research towards this direction. 2.