Abstract
Synthesizing pseudo samples is currently the most ef-fective way to solve the Generalized Zero Shot Learning (GZSL) problem. Most models achieve competitive per-formance but still suffer from two problems: (1) Feature confounding, the overall representations confound task-correlated and task-independent features, and existing mod-els disentangle them in a generative way, but they are unrea-sonable to synthesize reliable pseudo samples with limited samples; (2) Distribution uncertainty, that massive data is needed when existing models synthesize samples from the uncertain distribution, which causes poor performance in limited samples of seen classes. In this paper, we propose a non-generative model to address these problems corre-spondingly in two modules: (1) Task-correlated feature dis-entanglement, to exclude the task-correlated features from task-independent ones by adversarial learning of domain adaption towards reasonable synthesis; (2) Controllable pseudo sample synthesis, to synthesize edge-pseudo and center-pseudo samples with certain characteristics towards more diversity generated and intuitive transfer.
In adda-tion, to describe the new scene that is the limit seen class samples in the training process, we further formulate a new
ZSL task named the ‘Few-shot Seen class and Zero-shot Un-seen class learning’ (FSZU). Extensive experiments on four benchmarks verify that the proposed method is competitive in the GZSL and the FSZU tasks. 1.

Introduction
The explosion of data and the rapid development of deep learning need massive precise but expensive labels. In the real world, these labels are usually sparse/missing, Zero
Shot Learning (ZSL) techniques offer a good solution to ad-dress such problem, which trains on seen classes and tests on unseen classes (the seen classes and unseen classes are
*Corresponding author.
Figure 1. An illustration of core idea of our method. Different classes share class semantics. The images in the right half are the task-correlated features of the left half. They are excluded from task-independent features and are more consistent with class semantics, which is reasonable for the knowledge transfer in the
GZSL task. independent). In this paper, we focus on the Generalized
ZSL (GZSL) task. It is a realistic setting of ZSL in mak-ing predictions on recognizing samples from both classes simultaneously rather than classifying only samples of the unseen classes.
At present, the method of synthesizing pseudo samples for unseen classes has proven to be one of the most effec-tive ways of knowledge transfer to solve the GZSL prob-lem. But there are still two challenging problems: (1) Fea-ture Confounding. Most GZSL models are based on over-all representations of samples extracted in pre-trained CNN (e.g., ResNet101 [13]) while the semantic features are class-level attributes or class-level sentence embeddings [21, 40].
The former contains more rich information and inconsistent with human cognition. So it is unreasonable to construct a mapping from visual features to semantic features directly and synthesize reliable pseudo samples based on the con-founding visual features. Although some models [7, 23] contribute to extracting more human-consistent-cognition features, they are related to generative models and hard to
guarantee the diversity of sample synthesis with limited real samples. (2) Distribution Uncertainty. The existed methods, especially the generative models, usually require a large amount of data to ﬁt the distribution of real data, and can only synthesize pseudo samples with the uncertain distribu-tion. So these models have poor performances when sam-ples of seen class are few shot.
Figure 1 illustrates the motivation of our method. We
ﬁrst exclude the task-independent feature from horse image to horse object. Then we synthesize zebra’s pseudo samples of target class based on the horse’s task-correlated feature of source class in a non-generative way.
To be speciﬁc, we propose a non-generative approach named Task-correlated Disentanglement and Controllable
Samples Synthesis (TDCSS) method that handles above is-sues. The TDCSS mainly consists of two components. (1)
Task-correlated Feature Disentanglement Module. Our model is based on class semantic features to complete the image classiﬁcation task. According to whether the visual features are corresponding to class semantics, we disentan-gle the confounding features into task-correlated features and task-independent features. The task-correlated features are more consistent with class semantics. We introduce the adversarial training of domain adaptation to achieve feature disentanglement. (2) Controllable Pseudo Samples Syn-thesis Module. Based on task-correlated features, we add different offsets to synthesize two types of pseudo samples which are edge-pseudo samples and center-pseudo samples in a non-generative way. For the edge-pseudo samples, we treat them as the adversarial examples in the feature-level and the edge offsets can be seen as perturbations in adver-sarial examples. For the center-pseudo samples, we make them distributed closer to the center of one class. Both of them guarantee the generative diversity of samples based on the limited seen samples. In addition, synthesizing pseudo samples with certain characteristics contribute to exploring the role of different types of pseudo samples in the knowl-edge transfer of GZSL.
To describe the scene that only has the limited samples on seen class in formulation, we further propose a new
ZSL task named ‘Few-shot Seen class and Zero-shot Un-seen class learning (FSZU)’. The FSZU is also more rea-sonable and more practical. In the GZSL task, all classes have strong semantic relationships. So we believe that the
ZSL and the Few Shot Learning (FSL) are coexistent. For example, in the deep-space exploration and deep-sea explo-ration, the machine (detector) always encounter new situ-ations, and the number of seen class samples that humans have obtained is also extremely limited. In this paper, we perform the TDCSS and the similar methods on the new task.
In summary, our main contributions of this work are summarized as follows: (1) We propose a novel non-generative model that dis-entangles visual features into task-correlated and task-independent by adversarial training of domain adaptation.
And we use the task-correlated features to synthesize two types of pseudo samples as center-pseudo samples and edge-pseudo samples to guarantee the diversity of sample synthesis and the intuitive transfer. (2) We propose a new zero shot task named ‘Few-shot
Seen class and Zero-shot Unseen class learning (FSZU)’, which is more reasonable and more practical compared with the GZSL task in real life. (3) Extensive experiments in the GZSL task and the
FSZU task on four widely used datasets verify the results of the TDCSS are competitive with similar methods. 2.