Abstract
We introduce a new setting of Novel Class Discovery in
Semantic Segmentation (NCDSS), which aims at segment-ing unlabeled images containing new classes given prior knowledge from a labeled set of disjoint classes. In con-trast to existing approaches that look at novel class dis-covery in image classification, we focus on the more chal-lenging semantic segmentation. In NCDSS, we need to dis-tinguish the objects and background, and to handle the existence of multiple classes within an image, which in-creases the difficulty in using the unlabeled data. To tackle this new setting, we leverage the labeled base data and a saliency model to coarsely cluster novel classes for model training in our basic framework. Additionally, we propose the Entropy-based Uncertainty Modeling and Self-training (EUMS) framework to overcome noisy pseudo-labels, fur-ther improving the model performance on the novel classes.
Our EUMS utilizes an entropy ranking technique and a dy-namic reassignment to distill clean labels, thereby making full use of the noisy data via self-supervised learning. We build the NCDSS benchmark on the PASCAL-5i dataset and
COCO-20i dataset. Extensive experiments demonstrate the feasibility of the basic framework (achieving an average mIoU of 49.81% on PASCAL-5i) and the effectiveness of
EUMS framework (outperforming the basic framework by 9.28% mIoU on PASCAL-5i). 1.

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved signif-icant success in semantic segmentation [3, 19] in recent years. However, the success of DNNs heavily relies on the large number of annotated data, which incurs high annota-tion cost, especially for semantic segmentation where pixel-wise labeling is required. Several settings are proposed to alleviate the cost, such as semi-supervised learning (SSL), unsupervised learning (USL), etc. SSL [4, 41] utilizes a proportion of annotated data, aiming to achieve compara-ble performance with fully-supervised methods. Generally,
Figure 1. Illustration of Novel Class Discovery in Semantic Seg-mentation (NCDSS). Given a labeled set (person, horse, motorbike and car) and a class disjoint unlabeled set (bike and boat), NCDSS aims at leveraging all the data to segment novel images.
SSL is based on the assumption that the labeled and un-labeled data share the same label space. Nevertheless, it is possible to have data from the unseen novel classes in real-world semantic segmentation settings. Such data can be easily collected but difficult to annotate. USL [14, 30] is also introduced to mitigate the annotation cost. Due to the complexity of unlabeled data, USL cannot achieve satisfac-tory results without any prior knowledge.
In contrast to machine learning models, humans can eas-ily discover new categories with prior knowledge. For ex-ample, a kid can easily discover sheep when he/she knows how to distinguish between horse and cow. Based on this observation, a practical setting of Novel Class Dis-covery (NCD) [10] is introduced in the computer vision
community. NCD aims at discovering novel classes of the unlabeled data when given a set of labeled data of base classes, where the base and novel classes are disjoint. In view of the practicability of NCD, previous works [8, 10] explore NCD in the image classification task. In this pa-per, we further extend NCD to semantic segmentation and introduce a new setting, called Novel Class Discovery in
Semantic Segmentation (NCDSS), which is illustrated in
Fig. 1. Given a set of labeled data and a set of unla-beled data, the goal is to segment novel images with the prior knowledge from base foreground and background classes. Recently, a similar setting called weak-shot learn-ing (WSHL) [40] is introduced to semantic segmentation.
However, WSHL requires weak annotations for the novel data (e.g., image-level labels) and thus limiting its practical-ity. The comparison of different settings is shown in Tab. 1.
NCDSS is more challenging than NCD in classification.
In comparison with image classification that uses global information, semantic segmentation requires the model to classify the pixels of multiple foreground and background categories within one image based on the local information.
This greatly increases the difficulty in utilizing unlabeled novel class data. Despite the difficulty, it is worth inves-tigating NCD in semantic segmentation since it is not al-ways possible to label all classes of semantic labels. To address NCDSS, we first propose a basic framework in this paper. Specifically, we choose to cluster foreground fea-tures instead of the global features for more accurate clus-tering results. The foreground and background can be ef-fectively separated by estimating the saliency map from a well-trained saliency model. However, directly clustering the foreground pixels can lead to inaccurate labels due to the multiple foreground categories within an image. This problem can be addressed by prior knowledge from the base data. Concretely, we use the base model to detect high confidence pixels of the base classes, and ignore them when clustering. Our basic framework can coarsely seg-ment novel classes with the guidance of prior knowledge and therefore leading to a feasible solution for NCDSS.
There are three issues limiting the performance of our basic framework: 1) the estimated saliency maps are not sufficiently accurate; 2) unsupervised clustering alone can-not guarantee precise label assignments even when accurate saliency maps are given; 3) there are also circumstances that more than one novel classes may appear in one image (e.g., person and horse), and clustering can only assign one label for the novel salient part of one image. Consequently, the pseudo-labels generated by clustering are quite noisy (some pseudo-labels are unclean) and thus inevitably degrading the model performance [1,34]. Intuitively, the unclean clus-tering labels can be discarded, and the data can be treated as additional unlabeled data to boost the performance if using only the part of clean clustering pseudo-labels can achieve
Setting
Base Classes Novel Classes
SL
SSL
USL
WSHL
NCD fully semi unlabeled fully fully – – – weakly unlabeled
Table 1. Comparison of different semantic segmentation settings. comparable or better performance. To this end, we propose the Entropy-based Uncertainty Modeling and Self-training (EUMS) framework. EUMS uses entropy values obtained from the basic model to measure the uncertainty of novel images [24] and splits them into clean and unclean parts.
Lower entropy values indicate that the training images are assigned with more accurate pseudo-labels. For the unclean part, inspired by [27], we use online pseudo-labels from the teacher model to train the student model in a self-supervised manner. We observe that the average accuracy of clustering pseudo-labels in the clean part are higher than that of the whole novel set. However, hard classes (e.g., potted plant) are almost completely ignored when only a small ratio of data is split into clean part (e.g., 0.33), which has a perni-cious influence on model performance. Consequently, we start from a relatively high clean part ratio to learn a good model initialization, and then dynamically re-rank the clean data and reassign more data into the unclean part. This strat-egy encourages the model not to ignore any category and thus obtains further improvement.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We introduce a new setting of Novel Class Discovery in Semantic Segmentation (NCDSS), which is a prac-tical but underexplored problem. In addition, we pro-pose a basic framework which utilizes base class prior knowledge to discover novel categories.
• We propose the EUMS framework that distills accurate (clean) clustering pseudo-labels with entropy ranking and utilizing unclean data via self-training, which can effectively improve the model performance.
• We build the NCDSS benchmark on the PASCAL-5i dataset and COCO-20i dataset. Extensive experiments on the two benchmarks verify the effectiveness of our basic and EUMS frameworks. 2.