Abstract
Point-based object localization (POL), which pursues high-performance object sensing under low-cost data an-notation, has attracted increased attention. However, the point annotation mode inevitably introduces semantic vari-ance for the inconsistency of annotated points. Existing
POL methods heavily reply on accurate key-point annota-tions which are difficult to define. In this study, we propose a POL method using coarse point annotations, relaxing the supervision signals from accurate key points to freely spot-ted points. To this end, we propose a coarse point refine-ment (CPR) approach, which to our best knowledge is the first attempt to alleviate semantic variance from the per-spective of algorithm. CPR constructs point bags, selects semantic-correlated points, and produces semantic center points through multiple instance learning (MIL). In this way, CPR defines a weakly supervised evolution procedure, which ensures training high-performance object localizer under coarse point supervision. Experimental results on
COCO, DOTA and our proposed SeaPerson dataset vali-date the effectiveness of the CPR approach. The dataset and code will be available at https://github.com/ ucas-vg/PointTinyBenchmark/. 1.

Introduction
Humans can recognize and easily achieve a sense of the objects present in their eye-sight. In computer-vision, this is usually framed as drawing bounding boxes around ob-jects [21,25,40,41] or dense annotations of the entire scene
[13, 16]. However, one inevitable circumstance for training such models is that they require high-quality densely an-notated data which is expensive and difficult to obtain. In some applications [27], just the object’s location is neces-sary while costly annotation (e.g. bounding box) is redun-dant or even undesirable (e.g. a robotic arm aims at a single point to pick up an object [27]).
Hence point-based object localization (POL) is studied.
Due to the simple and time-efficient annotation, point-based object localization has attracted increasing attention in re-* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors. (hanzhj@ucas.ac.cn)
Figure 1. Examples of coarse point annotation and the problem of semantic variance. (Best viewed in color.) cent years [26, 29]. POL based methods require point-level object annotations and can predict the object’s location as a 2D coordinate in the original image.
However, while annotating an object as a point, there can be multiple candidate points. One problem that arises with optional candidate points is that multiple regions of vary-ing semantic information are labeled positive for the same class. Conversely, identical regions with similar semantic information are labeled differently. Take bird category as an example, during annotation, we label the bird’s different body parts (e.g. neck and tail etc.) as positive based on the visible regions in the image. Based on the annotation, for different images in the dataset, we have labeled same body part (e.g. neck) of the bird as both positive and negative (see Fig. 1). Therefore, during training, the model has to consider the neck region as positive for one image and neg-ative in another (the image where tail is annotated). This phenomenon introduces ambiguity and confuses the model which results in poor performance.
Previous works [29, 37] addressed this issue by setting strict annotation rules by annotating only the pre-defined key-point areas of the object. As a result, they suffer from i) the key points are not easy the following challenges: to define, especially for some broadly defined categories where they do not have a specific shape (Fig. 2 (a)); ii) the key point may not exist in the image due to the different poses of objects and different camera views (Fig. 2 (b)); iii) when objects have large scale variance, it is difficult to de-cide the appropriate granularity of the key points ( Fig. 2 (c)). For a person, if the head is a key point [29] (coarse-grained) then there remains a large semantic variance for the
(a) Chairs with different shapes. (b) Persons with different poses. (c) Persons of different sizes.
Figure 2. The difficulties of key-point based annotation. (a) Key points are hard to define due to the large in-class variance of shape. (b) Key point (e.g. head) does not exist due to multiple poses and views. (c) Key point’s granularity (eye, forehead, head or body) is hard to determine due to multiple scales. large-scale instance (whether to annotate the eye or nose). If the eye is labeled as a key point [37] (fine-grained) then the position of eyes for a small-scale instance cannot be identi-fied. Thus, the complicated annotation rules are required to solve the semantic variance problem from annotation per-spective, which considerably increases the annotation dif-ficulty and human burden. Therefore, the challenges men-tioned above restrict previous POL methods from exploring multi-class and multi-scale datasets (e.g. COCO or DOTA).
In this paper, we formulate the coarse point-based local-ization (CPL) paradigm for training a localizer of a general
POL, as shown in Fig. 3. We firstly adopt a coarse point annotation stragegy, which allows to annotate any point on an object. Then the coarse point refinement (CPR) algo-rithm is proposed to refine the initialized annotated coarse point to the semantic center in the training set. Finally, the refined points instead of the annotated points are used as su-pervision to train a localizer. The proposed CPR is the first attempt to alleviate semantic variance from the perspective of algorithm rather than annotation. Specifically, CPR finds the semantic points around the annotated point through mul-tiple instance learning (MIL) [9], then weighted averages the semantic points to obtain the semantic center, which has a smaller semantic variance and a higher tolerance for pre-diction errors. The contributions are: 1) We dive into point-based object localization (POL) task, and formulate the coarse point based localization (CPL) paradigm for general object localization, extending the previous works to a multi-class/multi-scale POL task; 2) The coarse point refinement (CPR) algorithm is pro-posed to alleviate the semantic variance from the perspec-tive of algorithm rather than rigid annotation rules; 3) The experimental results show the CPR is effective for CPL, which obtains a comparable performance with the center point (approximate key point) based object localiza-tion, and improves the performance over 10 points com-pared with the baseline; 4) A new dataset with more than 600,000 annotations, named SeaPerson, is introduced in this paper. This dataset can be used for tiny person detection and localization. 2.