Abstract 1.

Introduction
We propose a new problem formulation and a corre-sponding evaluation framework to advance research on unsupervised domain adaptation for semantic image seg-mentation. The overall goal is fostering the development of adaptive learning systems that will continuously learn, without supervision, in ever-changing environments. Typi-cal protocols that study adaptation algorithms for segmen-tation models are limited to few domains, adaptation hap-pens ofﬂine, and human intervention is generally required, at least to annotate data for hyper-parameter tuning. We ar-gue that such constraints are incompatible with algorithms that can continuously adapt to different real-world situa-tions. To address this, we propose a protocol where models need to learn online, from sequences of temporally corre-lated images, requiring continuous, frame-by-frame adap-tation. We accompany this new protocol with a variety of baselines to tackle the proposed formulation, as well as an extensive analysis of their behaviors, which can serve as a starting point for future research.
*https://europe.naverlabs.com
Machine learning systems will often face unfamiliar con-ditions when deployed in the real world. A self-driving car will encounter a new urban environment or unexpected weather; a domestic robot will be deployed in a new house.
In this regard, semantic image segmentation, a key task for both examples above, is an important case study. Due to the extremely high cost of manually annotating segmen-tation masks, it is very common to train segmentation mod-els on synthetic data [62, 65]; these models can then be adapted to real environments using domain adaptation tech-niques [16, 33, 34, 81, 86, 97]. Adaptation methods typically run ofﬂine, require multiple epochs, and generally rely on an annotated validation set from the target domain. Such assumptions are reasonable for certain scenarios; for in-stance, consider the problem of adapting a segmentation model for MRI from simulated data to real-scanner sam-ples: adaptation can happen ofﬂine, and one can ask some experts to provide at least a few annotated target samples for hyper-parameter selection.
Unfortunately, such assumptions do not hold for all sce-narios. In our initial example of a self-driving car equipped with a semantic segmentation module, once the car is on the
road, samples arrive sequentially, unlabeled, and the sur-rounding environment continually changes. The segmenta-tion model needs to jointly produce a prediction and contin-uously adapt as individual images arrive. This is one among many such scenarios that require unsupervised adaptation to happen online, continuously and without the possibility of extensive hyper-parameter tuning on new domains. We argue that there is a strong need for an appropriate formu-lation, ad hoc evaluation protocols and metrics speciﬁcally designed for this challenging adaptation problem.
This paper aims at ﬁlling this gap. We introduce a con-strained problem formulation, which requires online and unsupervised adaptation of semantic segmentation models.
The model is expected to adapt to new environments by processing sequences of temporally correlated frames, from ever changing domains. Therefore, this formulation does not allow processing large amounts of target samples ofﬂine nor performing extensive hyper-parameter search.
Concretely, our ﬁrst contribution is proposing a three-step train-val-deploy evaluation protocol that emulates as closely as possible the problem of adapting semantic seg-mentation models as the input distribution shifts. By design, cross-validating on “deploy” samples is not possible. The three steps are (i) Pre-training a segmentation model ofﬂine on simulated data; (ii) Validating the algorithms at hand, i.e. carefully choosing all the hyper-parameters – again on simulated data, yet mimicking the sequential nature of the real world; (iii) Testing the best adaptation algorithm – ac-cording to the previous validation step – on realistic, se-quential conditions. Those steps are illustrated in Fig. 1. We formalize this new problem and devise a proper benchmark for Online Adaptation for Semantic Image Segmentation, the OASIS benchmark.
Endowed with this framework, our second contribu-tion is tailoring and benchmarking a set of adaptation tech-niques from related ﬁelds for our problem (see Fig. 2). We also propose different learning strategies to accommodate the challenges that our protocol brings, reporting thorough comparisons among the different methods, and share our main ﬁndings, which can serve as a basis for future research on this task. As a third contribution, we assess the im-pact of catastrophic forgetting when continuously adapting without supervision and draft a family of methods based on a reset mechanism to mitigate this issue. 1 2.