Abstract
The industry practice for night video surveillance is to use auxiliary near-infrared (NIR) LEDs, usually centered at 850nm or 940nm, for scene illumination. NIR LEDs are used to save power consumption while hiding the surveil-lance coverage area from naked human eyes. The captured images are almost monochromatic, and visual color and texture tend to disappear, which hinders human and ma-chine perception. A few existing studies have tried to con-vert such NIR images to RGB images through deep learn-ing, which can not provide satisfying results, nor generalize well beyond the training dataset. In this paper, we aim to break the fundamental restrictions on reliable NIR-to-RGB (NIR2RGB) translation by examining the imaging mecha-nism of single-chip silicon-based RGB cameras under NIR illuminations, and propose to retrieve the optimal LED mul-tiplexing via deep learning. Experimental results show that this translation task can be significantly improved by prop-erly multiplexing NIR LEDs close to the visible spectral range than using 850nm and 940nm LEDs. 1.

Introduction
A visual surveillance system should ensure continuous and stable capture of high-quality images all day long.
However, images of a scene will appear quite different due to the change of ambient illumination. During the daytime, the camera works well under sufficient daylight, while the result is not satisfactory when the visible light is little. In order to improve the imaging quality, one general idea is to utilize additional illumination to enhance images, akin to the case for ordinary cameras that add a flash unit to in-crease lighting or lengthen the exposure time. However, the long exposure can cause motion blur [4], and the usage
*The first two authors contribute equally. The last two are the corre-spondence authors. This work was in part supported by Shanghai Munic-ipal Science and Technology Major Project (2021SHZDZX0102), and the
JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 20H05951. of white light will easily reveal the surveillance coverage, which is unwanted in many application cases.
Since human eye is not sensitive to light with a wave-length above 720nm, near-infrared (NIR) LEDs have been widely used for night-time surveillance. NIR LEDs take advantage of the sensitivity of the camera’s silicon sensor around the NIR band, making it possible to obtain visual information in the absence of visible light. Specifically, 850nm and 940nm narrow-band NIR LEDs are commonly used in surveillance device. But in most cases, the ac-quired images with NIR LEDs will still lose much color and texture information even if issues regarding brightness and noise do not exist. The reasons can be in two folds: 1) Camera spectral sensitivity (CSS) of three RGB chan-nels almost overlap around both 850nm and 940nm, so it is hard to record ’color’ (RGB three-channel variance). 2) Re-flectance spectra of many materials become indistinguish-able beyond 850nm. It makes one-to-one mapping difficult.
There are recent works [11, 14, 22, 23] trying to recover
RGB directly from NIR images, but the quality of recovered
RGB images is limited. The fundamental restriction lies in the fact that the mapping between NIR and RGB becomes ambiguous when using existing 850nm and 940nm LEDs for illumination. Therefore, a natural question is how to find a combination of LEDs such that the NIR2RGB translation task will be more well-posed. In this paper, we propose to retrieve the optimal LED multiplexing to reasonably maxi-mize the distinguishability of different materials in the NIR band, and finally to achieve stable NIR2RGB restoration.
Based on the principle of camera imaging, we estab-lish two criteria for finding the optimal LED spectral mul-tiplexing: First, based on typical spectral curves, we set the goal of maximizing the number of distinguished col-ors, and the optimal LED spectral multiplexing should max-imize the overall three-channel color variations. Second, more directly, the optimal LED combination should corre-spond to the smallest NIR2RGB image reconstruction er-ror. Through deep learning, we directly minimize the re-construction loss of NIR2RGB, and get the LED spectral
multiplexing that might be physically realized by lighten-ing a set of LEDs. The main highlights of this work are: 1) Rather than simply developing another network for
NIR2RGB translation, we bring a novel perspective to the community on how to robustify this task by engineering on the illumination multiplexing of existing NIR LEDs. 2) We propose two optimization schemes for retrieving the optimal LED spectral multiplexing: i) maximizing the number of distinguishable colors based on the variance of typical reflectance spectra; ii) minimizing NIR2RGB trans-lation error directly. To our best knowledge, this is the first work on optimal LED spectral selection for NIR2RGB translation. As such, the translation is achieved in a more lightweight way to achieve effective nighttime imaging compared with the majority line of works [5, 13, 25–27, 29] on developing complex enhancement models. images) to supplement 3) We have collected and released a Hyperspectral
Images (HSIs) dataset named IDH (Indoor-Darklight-Hyperspectral the existing HSI datasets in terms of quality and quantity. To the best of our knowledge, IDH is the first wide-range HSI dataset that simulates night surveillance imaging. The experimental re-sults show that high-quality RGB image generation can be effectively achieved with our method. 2.