Abstract
We propose a new method for constructing elimination tem-plates for efficient polynomial system solving of minimal problems in structure from motion, image matching, and camera tracking. We first construct a particular affine pa-rameterization of the elimination templates for systems with a finite number of distinct solutions. Then, we use a heuris-tic greedy optimization strategy over the space of parame-ters to get a template with a small size. We test our method on 34 minimal problems in computer vision. For all of them, we found the templates either of the same or smaller size compared to the state-of-the-art. For some difficult exam-ples, our templates are, e.g., 2.1, 2.5, 3.8, 6.6 times smaller.
For the problem of refractive absolute pose estimation with unknown focal length, we have found a template that is 20 times smaller. Our experiments on synthetic data also show that the new solvers are fast and numerically accurate. We also present a fast and numerically accurate solver for the problem of relative pose estimation with unknown common focal length and radial distortion. 1.

Introduction
Many tasks in 3D reconstruction [49, 50] and camera tracking [46, 55] lead to solving minimal problems [1, 4, 10, 25, 29, 36, 38, 45, 48, 51], which can be formulated as systems of polynomial equations.
The state-of-the-art approach to efficient solving poly-nomial systems for minimal problems is to use symbolic-numeric solvers based on elimination templates [5, 29, 33].
These solvers have two main parts. In the first offline part, an elimination template is constructed. The template con-sists of a map (formulas) from input data to a (Macaulay) coefficient matrix. The template is the same for different in-put generic (noisy) data. In the second online phase, the co-efficient matrix is filled by the data of a particular problem, reduced by the Gauss–Jordan (G–J) elimination and used to construct an eigenvalue/eigenvector computation prob-lem of an action matrix that delivers the solutions of the system.
While the offline phase is not time critical, the on-line phase has to be computed very fast (mostly in sub-millisecond time) to be useful for robust optimization based on RANSAC schemes [16]. Therefore, it is important to build templates (i.e., Macaulay matrices) that are as small as possible to make the G–J elimination fast. Besides the size, we also need to pay attention to building templates that lead to numerically stable computation. 1.1. Contribution
We develop a new approach to constructing elimination templates for efficiently solving minimal problems. First, using the general syzygy-based parameterization of elimi-nation templates from [33], we construct a partial (but still generic enough) parameterization of templates. Then, we apply a greedy heuristic optimization over the space of pa-rameters to find as small a template as possible.
We demonstrate our method on 34 minimal problems in geometric computer vision. For all of them, we found the templates either of the same or smaller size compared to the state-of-the-art. For some difficult examples, our templates are, e.g., 2.1, 2.5, 3.8, 6.6 times smaller. For the problem of refractive absolute pose estimation with unknown focal length, we have found a template that is 20 times smaller.
Our experiments on synthetic data also show that the new solvers are fast and numerically accurate.
We propose a practical solver for the problem of relative pose estimation with unknown common focal length and radial distortion. All previously presented solvers for this problem are either extremely slow or numerically unstable. 1.2.