Abstract
In contrast to the generic object, aerial targets are of-ten non-axis aligned with arbitrary orientations having the cluttered surroundings. Unlike the mainstreamed ap-proaches regressing the bounding box orientations, this paper proposes an effective adaptive points learning ap-proach to aerial object detection by taking advantage of the adaptive points representation, which is able to cap-ture the geometric information of the arbitrary-oriented instances. To this end, three oriented conversion func-tions are presented to facilitate the classiﬁcation and lo-calization with accurate orientation. Moreover, we pro-pose an effective quality assessment and sample assign-ment scheme for adaptive points learning toward choos-ing the representative oriented reppoints samples during training, which is able to capture the non-axis aligned fea-tures from adjacent objects or background noises. A spa-tial constraint is introduced to penalize the outlier points for roust adaptive learning. Experimental results on four challenging aerial datasets including DOTA, HRSC2016,
UCAS-AOD and DIOR-R, demonstrate the efﬁcacy of our proposed approach.
The source code is availabel at: https://github.com/LiWentomng/OrientedRepPoints. 1.

Introduction
Being an important computer vision task [4, 34, 37], aerial object detection has recently attracted increasing at-tention, which plays the signiﬁcant role in the remote im-age understanding. Different from the generic object de-tection, aerial target localization has its own difﬁculties, in-cluding non-axis aligned objects with arbitrary orientations
[3,9,24] and densely packed distribution with complex con-text [7, 37, 45].
The mainstreamed approaches typically treat aerial ob-ject detection as a problem of rotated object localization [3, 8,9,24,42,45]. Among them, the direct angle-based orienta-∗Corresponding author is Jianke Zhu. (a) Orientation-regressed method-RetinaNet [19] (b) Proposed Oriented RepPoints framework
Figure 1. (a) denotes the common baseline-RetinaNet [19] of ori-entation regression-based methods, (b) is the baseline method of our Oriented RepPoints. Comparing to the direct orientation re-gression, our approach can estimate more accurate orientations by learning the adaptive points that are marked as red. tion regression methods dominate this research area, which are derived from the general vanilla detectors [18,19,28,53] with the extra orientation parameter. Although having achieved promising performance, the direct orientation pre-diction still has some issues including the discontinuity of loss and regression inconsistency [25, 40, 41, 43]. This is mainly due to the bounded periodic nature of the angu-lar orientation and the orientation deﬁnition of the rotated bounding box. Despite of their attractive localization re-sults, the orientation regression-based detectors may not ac-curately predict the orientations, as shown in Fig. 1-(a).
To effectively address the above issues, we revisit the representation for aerial objects in order to avoid the sen-sitive orientation estimation. As a ﬁne-grained object rep-resentation, point set shows the great potential to capture the key semantic features in conventional generic detector like RepPoints [46]. However, its simple conversion func-tions only produce the upright-horizontal bounding boxes, which cannot precisely estimate the aerial objects’ orienta-tions. Moreover, RepPoints only regresses the key points
according to the semantic features while ignoring to effec-tively measure the quality of learned points. This may lead to the inferior performance for the non-axis aligned objects with dense-distribution and complex scene in aerial images.
In this work, we proposed an oriented object detector for aerial images, named Oriented RepPoints, which intro-duces the adaptive points representation for diverse orienta-tions, shapes and poses. In contrast to conventional orien-tation regression approach, our proposed method not only achieves the precise aerial detection with accurate orienta-tion, but also captures the underlying geometric structure of the arbitrary-oriented aerial instances, as shown in Fig. 1.
Speciﬁcally, the initial adaptive points are generated from the center point, which are further reﬁned to adapt for the aerial object. To obtain the oriented bounding box, three oriented conversion functions are presented according to the layouts of the learned points. Moreover, an effective adap-tive points assessment and assignment (APAA) scheme is proposed for point set learning, which measures the quality of oriented reppoints not only from the classiﬁcation, local-ization but also from their orientation and point-wise feature correlation during training. Such scheme enables the detec-tor to capture the non-axis aligned features from adjacent objects or background noises toward assigning the repre-sentative oriented reppoints samples. Furthermore, a spa-tial constraint is proposed to facilitate the vulnerable points to ﬁnd their instance owner from the complex context in the aerial scene. Compared with the orientation regression-based methods, our framework obtains more precise detec-tion performance with accurate orientation.
In summary, the main contributions of this paper are: (1) an effective aerial object detector named Oriented Rep-Points, where the ﬂexible adaptive points are introduced as the representation to achieve the oriented object detec-tion; (2) a novel quality assessment and sample assign-ment scheme for adaptive points learning, which selects the points sample not only from the classiﬁcation, localization but also from the orientation, point-wise feature correla-tion; (3) extensive experiments on four challenging datasets showing promising qualitative and quantitative results. 2.