Abstract
Rotated object detection is a challenging issue in com-puter vision ﬁeld.
Inadequate rotated representation and the confusion of parametric regression have been the bottle-neck for high performance rotated detection. In this paper, we propose an orientation-sensitive keypoint based rotated detector OSKDet. First, we adopt a set of keypoints to rep-resent the target and predict the keypoint heatmap on ROI to get the rotated box. By proposing the orientation-sensitive heatmap, OSKDet could learn the shape and direction of rotated target implicitly and has stronger modeling capa-bilities for rotated representation, which improves the lo-calization accuracy and acquires high quality detection re-sults. Second, we explore a new unordered keypoint rep-resentation paradigm, which could avoid the confusion of keypoint regression caused by rule based ordering. Further-more, we propose a localization quality uncertainty mod-ule to better predict the classiﬁcation score by the distri-bution uncertainty of keypoints heatmap. Experimental re-sults on several public benchmarks show the state-of-the-art performance of OSKDet. Speciﬁcally, we achieve an AP of 80.91% on DOTA, 89.98% on HRSC2016, 97.27% on
UCAS-AOD, and a F-measure of 92.18% on ICDAR2015, 81.43% on ICDAR2017, respectively. 1.

Introduction
With the success of deep convolutional neural networks (CNN), object detection has made an unprecedented break-through in recent years. General detection models [10, 16, 33] regress the horizontal bounding box of objects. How-ever, real scenes objects may have arbitrary directions, such as cars in drone cameras and texts in streetscape. Only de-termining the horizontal box is not enough to locate the tar-get accurately. Rotated object detection has a wide range of
This study was supported by the state key development program in 14th Five-Year under Grant No. 2021YFF0602103, 2021YFF0602102 and 2021QY1702. We also thank for the research fund under Grant No. 044007016.
*Corresponding author (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
Figure 1. (a) a rotated target represented by 8 keypoints in (b). (c) and (d) display the proposed orientation-sensitive heatmap, we en-code the keypoint to cross-star shape in corner and straight shape in edge areas, which represents the outline of target more accu-rately. (e) OSKDet: keypoint based detector. OSKDet gener-ates the orientation-sensitive keypoint heatmap, which has a strong modeling ability of spatial representation. applications, but still faces great challenges.
Recently, CNN based rotated detection has made a con-siderable progress. Some works [2, 5, 30, 46, 49] use the an-gle deﬁnition (coordinates of the center point, width, height, and rotated angle) to represent the rotated target. Other works [8, 23, 27, 32, 41] use vertex deﬁnition (coordinates of four vertices) to describe the rotated quadrilateral. Main-stream models mainly face the following issues: i) Inade-quate target representation. For angle deﬁnition, it is dif-ﬁcult for the model to learn the non intuitive angle and small deviations could lead to a sharp decline in IOU, while for the vertex diﬁnition, existing heatmaps, like Gaussian heatmap, could not accurately represent the spatial charac-ii) Confusion of parametric teristics of the rotated target. order, which is caused by the parametric exchangeability and deﬁnition periodicity of rotated targets, and manual la-beling errors exacerbate this problem. Similar samples with different optimization directions will cause learning confu-sion. In fact, these issues could largely affect detection per-formance.
In this paper, we propose an orientation-sensitive heatmap based rotated detector OSKDet. We encode a set of keypoints to represent rotated target. Considering that ro-tated target has more obvious features at the vertex and edge areas, we design an orientation-sensitive heatmap, as shown in Fig 1(c) and Fig 1(d), which could better match the target shape, and the model could learn the orientation and shape of rotated target implicitly. OSKDet has stronger model-ing capabilities in spatial representation and transformation.
Furthermore, we explore an unordered keypoint fusion rep-resentation, which could eliminate the keypoint order con-fusion problem to the greatest extent. We also propose a location quality uncertainty module to better improve the classiﬁcation accuracy by the generated heatmaps. The pro-posed three modules can notably improve rotated detection accuracy. Extensive experiments on public benchmarks, in-cluding aerial dataset DOTA [40], HRSC2016 [28], UCAS-AOD [54], scene text dataset ICDAR2015 [15] and IC-DAR2017MLT [31], show the superiority of OSKDet.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows: 1) We propose a keypoint heatmap based rotated detec-tor OSKDet. We design an orientation-sensitive heatmap to better represent the rotated target, which could learn the shape and direction of the rotated target, and plays a signif-icant role in improving the localization accuracy. 2) We explore a novel unordered keypoint heatmap fu-sion method. This new representation could eliminate the learning confusion caused by rule based keypoint ordering. 3) We propose a localization quality uncertainty mod-ule, which effectively improves the classiﬁcation score con-ﬁdence through the feature fusion of keypoint localization distribution. 2.