Abstract
We address the problem of inferring the anatomic skele-ton of a person, in an arbitrary pose, from the 3D surface of the body; i.e. we predict the inside (bones) from the outside (skin). This has many applications in medicine and biome-chanics. Existing state-of-the-art biomechanical skeletons are detailed but do not easily generalize to new subjects.
Additionally, computer vision and graphics methods that predict skeletons are typically heuristic, not learned from data, do not leverage the full 3D body surface, and are not validated against ground truth. To our knowledge, our system, called OSSO (Obtaining Skeletal Shape from Out-side), is the first to learn the mapping from the 3D body surface to the internal skeleton from real data. We do so using 1000 male and 1000 female dual-energy X-ray ab-sorptiometry (DXA) scans. To these, we fit a parametric 3D body shape model (STAR) to capture the body surface and a novel part-based 3D skeleton model to capture the bones.
This provides inside/outside training pairs. We model the statistical variation of full skeletons using PCA in a pose-normalized space and train a regressor from body shape pa-rameters to skeleton shape parameters. Given an arbitrary 3D body shape and pose, OSSO predicts a realistic skeleton inside. In contrast to previous work, we evaluate the accu-racy of the skeleton shape quantitatively on held out DXA scans, outperforming the state-of-the art. We also show 3D skeleton prediction from varied and challenging 3D bodies.
The code to infer a skeleton from a body shape is available at https://osso.is.tue.mpg.de, and the dataset of paired outer surface (skin) and skeleton (bone) meshes is available as a Biobank Returned Dataset. This research has been conducted using the UK Biobank Resource. 1.

Introduction
The estimation of 3D human pose and shape (HPS) from images, video, and other data sources is widely studied and has many applications. Current methods for HPS exploit detailed models of the visible surface of the human body learned from 3D scans. While the surface shape is accu-rate, these models are all based on a “skeleton” that only approximately models the kinematic structure of the body using a small number of linear segments with ball joints.
While these simplified skeletons are useful for the anima-tion of virtual characters and action recognition, they are not appropriate for applications in medicine and biomechanics.
Moreover, each 3D body model defines its own kinematic skeleton; transferring 3D pose information between them often requires optimization and introduces errors. To be
more widely relevant, HPS methods need to output a skele-ton that corresponds to the true, anatomic, human skeleton.
No statistical body model exists that captures both the de-tailed outer surface of the body and the anatomic skeletal structure inside. The key problem is the lack of paired data capturing the inside and outside of the body.
In this work, we address the problem of inferring the hu-man anatomic skeleton, i.e. the bone shapes and locations, solely from surface observations. That is, we infer the bones from the skin. To that end, we learn a statistical model of the skeleton shape and its correlation with the skin surface (Fig. 1 left). Given a posed body, our method predicts the skeleton from the body shape, and poses it inside subject to anatomic constraints (Fig. 1 right).
Anatomic body models with skin and bones are impor-tant in computer graphics, medicine and biomechanics, en-abling realistic animation of the body anatomy and phys-ical simulation of body motion. Existing state-of-the-art anatomic models [8,9,21,33] represent different body parts: skin, muscles, organs, skeleton. They are mainly devel-oped for sports, health applications or educational purposes.
While very detailed, they don’t generalize easily to new subjects. Graphics-oriented anatomic skeletons [1,4,15,43] can deform the individual bones with simple geometric transformations (e.g. scale or affine) and can be fit to new subjects. However, these deformations lack anatomic real-ism relative to actual skeletons. We argue that this realism can be improved using a data-driven strategy.
In computer vision, 3D statistical shape models of the human body are widely used [3, 20, 23, 41]. These have two elements in common: they model the human external shape, i.e. the skin surface, and they are learned from data.
Using thousands of 3D scans, these models capture the sta-tistical variability of the human body shape. Here we use
STAR [23], because it has a richer shape representation than
SMPL [20]. Such models, however, employ a simplified kinematic skeleton and joints. While they can be readily in-ferred from data, the idealized skeletal structure means that they cannot be used for applications in biomechanics.
To address these issues, we take a data-driven approach and learn a statistical skeleton shape model, as well as the mapping from body shape to this skeleton model. Our method, OSSO (Obtaining Skeletal Shape from Outside), takes a STAR model instance of any shape and pose, and estimates its corresponding skeleton. The skeleton can then be animated by reposing the STAR model.
The key problem, however, is obtaining training data that simultaneously gives the inside and outside of the body in 3D. Most imaging technologies that simultaneously capture the inside and outside of the body use ionizing radiation, which is harmful to humans; e.g. Computed Tomography (CT) and X-rays. This means that such data is extremely limited, preventing learning-based methods. Our insight is
Figure 2. Top: Pairs of soft tissue (IS) and bone (IB) DXA im-ages. Bottom: Computed skin (MS) and bone (MB) masks. to use dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) data. DXA scans use low-dose X-rays to measure bone mineral density and body fat composition. The radiation level is so low that it is certified to be used on healthy patients for clinical stud-ies, such as the UK Biobank [36]. In a DXA scan, two im-ages are computed by combining two different energy lev-els: a soft-tissue image IS and a bone image IB (Fig. 2). In
IS the silhouette of the body can clearly be seen, whereas
IB reveals the structure and shape of the bones.
Unfortunately, DXA does not produce 3D data. Conse-quently, we fit the STAR body model to the soft-tissue im-age to obtain an estimate of the outer 3D body surface. We also employ a constrained part-based fitting method to fit bones to the DXA bone image. These then provide pairs of inside and outside data for training. We use 1200 male and 1200 female DXA images from UK Biobank [36], which we split into training and evaluation sets. From the training set we learn skeletal shape variation and the mapping from outside to inside. Given a new body shape and pose, OSSO reposes the body to a canonical pose and predicts the skele-ton inside. It then reposes the skeleton to the input pose, subject to various anatomic constraints. With ground truth
DXA scans, we validate the reposing in lying down poses and show that OSSO outperforms Anatomy Transfer [1].
We also demonstrate the use of OSSO by estimating skele-tons for a variety of body shapes and poses.
OSSO makes the following contributions: (1) We fit a 3D body model to DXA images to obtain 3D body shape. (2) We fit a collection of bones to DXA images using a va-riety of constraints. (3) We learn a statistical (PCA) model of skeleton shape variation, capturing correlations between
bones. (4) We learn a mapping from external body shape to internal skeleton shape. (5) Given a 3D body in any pose, we repose the body, predict the skeleton, and repose under physical constraints to obtain a plausible posed skeleton. (6)
We demonstrate superior performance to other approaches, validated on DXA imagery. (7) We show varied reposing results for 3D bodies estimated from 3D scans. (8) Infer-ence code is available for research purposes. (9) The paired outer surfaces (skin) and skeleton (bone) meshes are made available as a Biobank Returned Dataset.
In summary, OSSO provides a data-driven approach to enrich 3D human pose and shape estimation with skeletal information. This is a step towards biomechanics in the wild. Methods that estimate models like SMPL or STAR from images and video can immediately use OSSO to es-timate the skeletal structure. While many methods provide some sort of visually appealing skeleton, our work is the first to learn and validate such a skeleton based on data of the inside and the outside of the body. 2.