Abstract
Personalized image aesthetics assessment (PIAA) is challenging due to its highly subjective nature. People’s aesthetic tastes depend on diversiﬁed factors, including im-age characteristics and subject characters. The existing
PIAA databases are limited in terms of annotation diver-sity, especially the subject aspect, which can no longer meet the increasing demands of PIAA research. To solve the dilemma, we conduct so far, the most comprehensive sub-jective study of personalized image aesthetics and introduce a new Personalized image Aesthetics database with Rich At-tributes (PARA), which consists of 31,220 images with an-notations by 438 subjects. PARA features wealthy annota-tions, including 9 image-oriented objective attributes and 4 human-oriented subjective attributes. In addition, desensi-tized subject information, such as personality traits, is also provided to support study of PIAA and user portraits. A comprehensive analysis of the annotation data is provided and statistic study indicates that the aesthetic preferences can be mirrored by proposed subjective attributes. We also propose a conditional PIAA model by utilizing subject in-formation as conditional prior. Experimental results indi-cate that the conditional PIAA model can outperform the control group, which is also the ﬁrst attempt to demonstrate how image aesthetics and subject characters interact to pro-duce the intricate personalized tastes on image aesthetics.
We believe the database and the associated analysis would be useful for conducting next-generation PIAA study. The project page of PARA can be found at: https://cv-datasets.institutecv.com/#/data-sets . 1.

Introduction
Image aesthetics assessment (IAA) aims at evaluating photo aesthetics computationally. Due to the highly differ-entiated aesthetic preference, image aesthetics assessment
*Corresponding author
†Equal contribution (a) Animal (b) Building (c) Food (d) Indoor (e) Night scene (f) Plant (g) Portrait (h) Scene (i) Still life (j) Others
Figure 1. Sample images in PARA. can be divided into two categories: generic and personal-ized image aesthetics assessment (a.k.a GIAA and PIAA)
[13]. For GIAA, an image is annotated by different vot-ers and mean opinion score (MOS) is used as the aesthetics
“ground truth”. However, GIAA merely reﬂects an “av-erage opinion”, which neglects the highly subjective na-ture of aesthetic tastes. To mitigate this issue, PIAA was proposed to capture unique aesthetic preferences [13]. In the past decade, PIAA has achieved encouraging advances.
Initially, Ren et al. [13] proposed the ﬁrst PIAA database named FLICKR-AES and they addressed this problem by
leveraging GIAA knowledge on user-related data, so that model can capture aesthetic “offset”. Later, research work attempted to learn PIAA from various perspectives, such as multi-modal collaborative learning [17], meta-learning
[21], multi-task learning [7], deep reinforcement learning
[10] etc. High quality databases are essential for build-ing data-driven PIAA models. However, current databases, such as FLICKR-AES [13] and AADB [6], are limited in annotation diversity. For comparison, we summarize the annotation information of three related databases in Table 1 and it is easy to observe that most databases are limited in annotation diversity.
Database
AADB [6]
REAL CUR [13]
FLICKR-AES [13]
Ours (PARA)
Subjective label
Objective label (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
Annotation count
Avg. annotation times per image
Num. of images
Num. of annotation dimension
Num. of subject 600 k 2.87 k 200 k
∼ 9723 k 5 1 5 25.87 10,000 2,870 40,000 31,220 12 1 1 13 190 14 210 438
Table 1. Comparison among PIAA databases. Note that the “anno-tation count” is calculated by multiply Num. of images, average annotation times per image and Num. of annotation dimension.
Since scene label is assigned to each image before annotation be-gins, we add the number of scene label separately.
Objective label
# Subjective label
Session ID
Image name
User ID
Aesthetics
Quality
Composition
Color
Depth of Field
Content
Light object emphasis
User ID session1 iaa pub1 .jpg Age
A3c6418 3.0 3.1 3 4 3 3 4 0 (False)
Gender
Education experience
Artistic experience
Photographic experience
E
A
N
O
C
Scene categories animal
Emotion
Difﬁculty of judgement
Content preference
Willingness to share
A3c6418 30 male
University proﬁcient proﬁcient 5 9 4 7 9
Neutral
-1 (Easy) 3 (Neutral) 3 (Neutral)
Table 2. Annotation information of single image. The annotations are divided into two groups, including objective and subjective in-formation. The subjective and objective annotation can be associ-ated by user ID.
To mitigate this issue, we notice that attributes usually provide a richer description to explicitly characterize differ-entiation [6]. Therefore, beyond aesthetics score, we pro-vide quantitative personalized aesthetics attributes annota-tions to facilitate more accurate aesthetic preference mod-eling. Here, considering the highly subjective nature of
PIAA task, different from the existing databases FLICKR-AES [13] and AADB [6], we design the label system of
PARA from two perspectives, which are human-oriented and image-oriented annotations. Speciﬁcally, apart from image aesthetics attributes, we also collect subjective an-notations, including 1) content preference, 2) difﬁculty of judgment, 3) emotion, 4) willingness to share. We believe the aforementioned dimensions can bring further research opportunities in understanding correlation between PIAA and psychological feelings.
In addition, we also provide desensitized subject information (user ID, age, gender, edu-cation, personality trait, photographic experience, art expe-rience) for more in-depth analysis in the future. Annotation dimensions of single image are demonstrated in Table 2.
In this paper, we build so far, the richest annotated personalized image aesthetic assessment database named
“PARA”. In addition, we also conduct an in-depth analysis of annotation information and propose a benchmark for this database. Contributions of this work can be summarized as follows:
• We conduct so far, the most comprehensive subjec-tive study of personalized image aesthetics, and build a PIAA database with rich annotations. Speciﬁcally, we collected 31,220 images and each image is anno-tated by 25 subjects in average and 438 subjects in to-tal. Each image is annotated with 4 human-oriented subjective attributes and 9 image-oriented objective at-tributes. To support in-depth analysis, we also provide desensitized subject information.
• We provide an in-depth analysis to discover charac-teristics of annotations dimensions. Statistical results indicate that the personalized aesthetic preference can be mirrored by the proposed human-oriented subjec-tive attributes, including personality traits, difﬁculty of judgement and image emotion, which in turn enlight-ens novel research angles, such as modeling personal-ized aesthetic by utilizing subject information.
• We conduct a benchmark study based on the proposed
PARA database. The benchmark contains two mod-els, including unconditional and conditional PIAA. By utilizing subject information as a condition when mod-eling aesthetic preference, we prove that training with human-oriented annotations can further improve the
PIAA model performance. 2.