Abstract
Blind deblurring has attracted much interest with its wide applications in reality. The blind deblurring problem is usually solved by estimating the intermediate kernel and the intermediate image alternatively, which will finally con-verge to the blurring kernel of the observed image. Nu-merous works have been proposed to obtain intermediate images with fewer undesirable artifacts by designing deli-cate regularization on the latent solution. However, these methods still fail while dealing with images containing sat-urations and large blurs. To address this problem, we pro-pose an intermediate image correction method which uti-lizes Bayes posterior estimation to screen through the in-termediate image and exclude those unfavorable pixels to reduce their influence for kernel estimation. Extensive ex-periments have proved that the proposed method can ef-fectively improve the accuracy of the final derived kernel against the state-of-the-art methods on benchmark datasets by both quantitative and qualitative comparisons. 1.

Introduction
Blurry images can easily occur when the photography equipment suffers from slight movement. As the target scene is usually irreproducible, how to efficiently recover the contents from the blurry images has attracted much at-tention. Mathematically, the degradation of a blurry image is usually modeled as a convolution of a latent sharp im-age U with a spatial invariant kernel K which represents the moving trajectory of the equipment. Hence, we have:
B = K ∗ U + ε, (1) where B denotes the observed blurry image, ∗ denotes the convolution operator and ε is additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) which frequently appears in the real world.
*Corresponding authors (a) Blurry image (b) Liu et al. [17] (c) Pan et al. [21] (d) Ours (e) Blurry image (f) Liu et al. [17] (g) Pan et al. [21] (h) Ours
Figure 1. The comparison of the estimated kernel and deblurred results on two challenging cases. The first line shows the results of an image blurred by a large kernel; the second line shows the re-sults of an image captured in the real world with saturation points.
Note that the kernel in the bottom left of the blurry image is used for synthetic while others are estimated. In these cases, our method estimates the kernel accurately while other methods get noisy ker-nels or fail to estimate any shape. (Zoom in for better viewing).
As both the blurring kernel K and the sharp image U are unknown, a common strategy is to update them in an alternative way. Starting from an initial guess K0, for any iteration k, we can iterate as follows: (cid:8)∥B − Kk ∗ U∥2
U k+1 = argmin 2 + ρU (U)(cid:9) ,
U
Kk+1 = argmin
K (cid:8)∥B − K ∗ U k+1∥2 2 + ρK(K)(cid:9) , (2) where ρU (U) and ρK(K) are regularizers designed by some suitable priors on the latent desired image and kernel. The procedure in Eq. (2), which is aimed to produce the final estimated kernel, is referred to as blind deblurring [1, 9, 17, 22,24,37]. Following it, the final deblurred image is derived using a non-blind deblurring model [5, 33], which takes the kernel returned by the blind deblurring and the given kernel
K plays a great role on the final result. In this regard, our goal is to improve the accuracy of the kernel derived by the blind deblurring procedure Eq. (2) to enhance the final
deblurred result.
Many excellent works have been investigated to design the formulas of ρU (U) and ρK(K) in Eq. (2) to improve the kernel estimation accuracy [4,11,17,24,32,34–36]. Among them, significant efforts have been made to drive the inter-mediate image closer to the sharp image with less artifacts, so as to use it to get an ideal kernel. Specifically, Pan et al. [24] proposed a generic regularization on the dark chan-nel of the latent sharp image, and reached leading perfor-mance. Furthermore, Liu et al. [17] proposed a surface-aware function smoothing the artifacts presented in the in-termediate images and produced a more exact kernel.
Despite their effectiveness in many cases, their perfor-mance degrades inevitably while dealing with the blurry images with large blurs or saturations. There are two major problems that easily occur in these challenging cases. As illustrated in Fig. 1 (a)-(c), while estimating the large ker-nel from images, the methods [17, 21] generate rather noisy kernels, with which the final deblurred results contain seri-ous ringing artifacts. In the other case illustrated in Fig. 1 (e)-(g), when the iteration Eq. (2) increases, the estimated intermediate image remains as the blurry input and the es-timated kernel remains as the nearly identity input, which means they fall into the local minimizer of the non-convex blind deblurring problem.
To solve these problems, we propose a pixel screening method to further correct the intermediate image, believ-ing that a good intermediate image facilitates to estimate a better kernel. From our observation of the conventional de-blurring iterations, whose details are illustrated in Fig. 2, we find that there exists a certain number of pixels in the intermediate images that does not satisfy the model Eq. (1) with the given estimated kernel. Moreover, we can see from
Fig. 2 that these pixels are useless and even harmful for ker-nel estimation. As these unnecessary structures have ad-verse influence on kernel estimation in the next step, we are motivated to utilize a random operator to distinguish them from the normal pixels. Hence, we propose a pixel screen-ing map which calculates the weight for each pixel to decide whether it conforms Eq. (1). Those undesirable pixels will then be removed from the intermediate image for the sub-sequent kernel estimation step. In this way, we effectively relieve the influence of those unfavorable structures and ob-tain the more accurate blurring kernels.
The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows: (1) we initially find that the linear degrada-tion model helps in locating the unnecessary structures in the intermediate images; (2) we propose a new and effec-tive blind deblurring model by correcting the intermediate image with the proposed pixel screening strategy, which proves to prompt the kernel away from the initial loca-tion and facilitate a more accurate kernel estimation; (3) we demonstrate the superiority of our method on the common benchmark datasets [12, 14, 16], and the specific challeng-ing benchmarks with large blur kernels and saturation as well as the real-world images by comparing with the state-of-the-art both quantitatively and qualitatively. 2.