Abstract
In real-world applications of machine learning, reliable and safe systems must consider measures of performance beyond standard test set accuracy. These other goals in-clude out-of-distribution (OOD) robustness, prediction con-sistency, resilience to adversaries, calibrated uncertainty estimates, and the ability to detect anomalous inputs. How-ever, improving performance towards these goals is often a balancing act that today’s methods cannot achieve without sacriﬁcing performance on other safety axes. For instance, adversarial training improves adversarial robustness but sharply degrades other classiﬁer performance metrics. Sim-ilarly, strong data augmentation and regularization tech-niques often improve OOD robustness but harm anomaly detection, raising the question of whether a Pareto improve-ment on all existing safety measures is possible. To meet this challenge, we design a new data augmentation strategy utilizing the natural structural complexity of pictures such as fractals, which outperforms numerous baselines, is near
Pareto-optimal, and roundly improves safety measures. 1.

Introduction
A central challenge in machine learning is building mod-els that are reliable and safe in the real world. In addition to performing well on the training distribution, deployed models should be robust to distribution shifts, consistent in their predictions, resilient to adversaries, calibrated in their uncertainty estimates, and capable of identifying anoma-lous inputs. Numerous prior works have tackled each of these problems separately [10, 12, 15, 31], but they can also be grouped together as various aspects of ML Safety [14].
Consequently, the properties listed above can be thought of as safety measures.
Ideally, models deployed in real-world settings would
*Equal Contribution.
Figure 1. Normalized performance of different methods on ﬁve different model safety measures. PIXMIX is the only method that signiﬁcantly outperforms the baseline in all ﬁve safety measures. perform well on multiple safety measures. Unfortunately, prior work has shown that optimizing for some desirable properties often comes at the cost of others. For example, adversarial training only improves adversarial robustness and degrades classiﬁcation performance [46]. Similarly, in-ducing consistent predictions on out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs seems to be at odds with better detecting these in-puts, an intuition supported by recent work [4] which ﬁnds
Baseline
Cutout
Mixup
CutMix
PIXMIX
Method
Corruptions mCE (↓)
Adversaries
Error (↓)
Consistency mFR (↓)
Calibration
RMS Error (↓)
Anomaly Detection
AUROC (↑) 50.0
+0.0 96.5
+0.0 10.7
+0.0 31.2
+0.0 77.7
+0.0 51.5
+1.5 98.5
+1.0 11.9
+1.2 31.1
−0.1 74.3
−3.4 48.0
−2.0 97.4
+0.9 9.5
−1.2 13.0
−18.1 71.7
−6.0 51.5
+1.5 97.0
+0.5 12.0
+1.3 29.3
−1.8 74.4
−3.3 30.5
−19.5 92.9
−3.9 5.7
−5.0 8.1
−23.0 89.3
+11.6
Table 1. PIXMIX comprehensively improves safety measures, providing signiﬁcant improvements over state-of-the-art baselines. We observe that previous augmentation methods introduce few additional sources of structural complexity. By contrast, PIXMIX incorporates fractals and feature visualizations into the training process, actively exposing models to new sources of structural complexity. We ﬁnd that
PIXMIX is able to improve both robustness and uncertainty estimation and is the ﬁrst method to substantially improve all existing safety measures over the baseline. that existing help with some safety metrics but harm oth-ers. This raises the question of whether improving all safety measures is possible with a single model.
While previous augmentation methods create images that are different (e.g., translations) or more entropic (e.g., additive Gaussian noise), we argue that an important under-explored axis is creating images that are more complex. As opposed to entropy or descriptive difﬁculty, which is max-imized by pure noise distributions, structural complexity is often described in terms of the degree of organization [28].
A classic example of structurally complex objects is frac-tals, which have recently proven useful for pretraining im-age classiﬁers [22, 34]. Thus, an interesting question is whether sources of structural complexity can be leveraged to improve safety through data augmentation techniques.
We show that Pareto improvements are possible with
PIXMIX, a simple and effective data processing method that leverages pictures with complex structures and sub-stantially improves all existing safety measures. PIXMIX consists of a new data processing pipeline that incorpo-rates structurally complex “dreamlike” images.
These dreamlike images include fractals and feature visualiza-tions. We ﬁnd that feature visualizations are a suit-able source of complexity, thereby demonstrating that they have uses beyond interpretability.
In extensive experi-ments, we ﬁnd that PIXMIX provides substantial gains on a broad range of existing safety measures, outperform-ing numerous previous methods. Code is available at github.com/andyzoujm/pixmix. 2.