Abstract
The construction of 3D point cloud datasets requires a great deal of human effort. Therefore, constructing a large-scale 3D point clouds dataset is difficult. In order to rem-edy this issue, we propose a newly developed point cloud fractal database (PC-FractalDB), which is a novel family of formula-driven supervised learning inspired by fractal geometry encountered in natural 3D structures. Our re-search is based on the hypothesis that we could learn rep-resentations from more real-world 3D patterns than con-ventional 3D datasets by learning fractal geometry. We show how the PC-FractalDB facilitates solving several re-cent dataset-related problems in 3D scene understanding, such as 3D model collection and labor-intensive annota-tion. The experimental section shows how we achieved the performance rate of up to 61.9% and 59.0% for the Scan-NetV2 and SUN RGB-D datasets, respectively, over the cur-rent highest scores obtained with the PointContrast, con-trastive scene contexts (CSC), and RandomRooms. More-over, the PC-FractalDB pre-trained model is especially ef-fective in training with limited data. For example, in 10% of training data on ScanNetV2, the PC-FractalDB pre-trained
VoteNet performs at 38.3%, which is +14.8% higher accu-racy than CSC. Of particular note, we found that the pro-posed method achieves the highest results for 3D object de-tection pre-training in limited point cloud data. 1 1.

Introduction
Recently, 3D object recognition with 3D point clouds is expected to become increasingly helpful in real-world ap-plications, such as mobile robots and self-driving cars. In particular, 3D object detection estimates the location and category of an object from 3D scenes. Compared with image-based detection models, 3D point clouds enable ro-bust detection of real-world objects without relying on ap-pearance. However, a limitation of constructing 3D datasets is that this requires a significant workforce to create and an-*indicates equal contribution. 1Dataset release: https://ryosuke- yamada.github.io/
PointCloud-FractalDataBase/ (a) Pre-training: 3D object detection with PC-FractalDB. (b) Fine-tuning results for a limited ScanNet data.
Figure 1. Pre-training effects on the PC-FractalDB as a family of formula-driven supervised learning. Although the proposed method does not use real data, it is a better pre-training approach to understand a 3D scene, especially in a limited data scenario. notate the 3D model, and such 3D models cannot usually be collected in large quantities via the Internet. For this rea-son, it is necessary to either create 3D models via computer-aided design (CAD) software or scan 3D scenes from the real environment using sensors such as LiDAR scans. In addition, constructing a point cloud dataset based on a 3D scene will result in human annotators and cross-validators.
Training with limited data or annotation tends to cause over-fitting of the detection model. Therefore, the present study focuses on pre-training with the point cloud dataset to solve the abovementioned problems.
We have already witnessed the effectiveness of pre-training in point cloud processing. In order to address the
human annotation problem for point cloud datasets, self-supervised learning (SSL) has been proposed [1, 27, 35, 52, 54, 59, 63, 67, 70].
In particular, PointContrast [67] demonstrates the possibility of pre-training for the first time higher-level scene understanding tasks, namely 3D object detection and 3D object segmentation. After the advent of PointContrast, self-supervised learning using contrastive learning has been proven the best performance on point cloud datasets such as ScanNetV2 [17] and SUN RGB-D [58] in 3D object detection. A limitation of these meth-ods, since pre-training is restricted to a backbone network only, and training data depend on the scale of a point cloud dataset. Therefore, to achieve accurate detection of 3D ob-jects, we need to develop approaches to reduce the annota-tion effort on datasets and effective pre-training methods.
The present paper describes a point cloud pre-training method that automatically constructs a point cloud dataset under the laws governing natural 3D structures. More specifically, we implement the concept of formula-driven supervised learning (FDSL) to 3D vision that generates in-finite training data based on a mathematical formula pro-posed by Kataoka et al. in 2D vision [32]. The present study uses a mathematical formula based on fractal geom-etry [41], which is assumed to be highly applicable to nat-ural and artificial objects in real-world 3D scenes. Since fractal geometry has two essential properties, self-similarity and non-integer dimensions, we believe it can generate fine-grained 3D structures that CAD models cannot represent.
Our proposed point cloud fractal database (PCFrac-talDB) enables users to significantly improve the represen-tation learning for 3D object detection. By focusing on frac-tal geometry, a piece of background knowledge in the real-world, it is possible to automatically generate 3D models and 3D scenes that resemble real-world nature. Thus, we do not require human labor to auto-construct a point cloud dataset by following natural law.
We summarize the contributions in the present study as follows: (i) We propose the PC-FractalDB automatically generated by natural 3D structures with fractals. Notably, this framework does not require data collection and anno-tation. The PC-FractalDB directly enables the acquisition of feature representation for 3D object detection in the pre-training phase, shown in Fig. 1(a). (ii) By creating the PC-FractalDB pre-trained detector, we have improved perfor-mance rates in 3D object detection tasks on representative point cloud datasets, such as ScanNetV2 and SUN RGB-D. (iii) Our proposed PC-FractalDB pre-training assists when fine-tuning for the dataset limited to the number of training data and annotation, shown in Fig. 1(b). 2.