Abstract
While most state-of-the-art instance segmentation meth-ods produce binary segmentation masks, geographic and cartographic applications typically require precise vector polygons of extracted objects instead of rasterized output.
This paper introduces PolyWorld, a neural network that di-rectly extracts building vertices from an image and connects them correctly to create precise polygons. The model pre-dicts the connection strength between each pair of vertices using a graph neural network and estimates the assign-ments by solving a differentiable optimal transport problem.
Moreover, the vertex positions are optimized by minimiz-ing a combined segmentation and polygonal angle differ-ence loss. PolyWorld signiﬁcantly outperforms the state of the art in building polygonization and achieves not only no-table quantitative results, but also produces visually pleas-ing building polygons. Code and trained weights are pub-licly available at https://github.com/zorzi-s/
PolyWorldPretrainedNetwork. 1.

Introduction
The extraction of vector representations of building poly-gons from aerial and satellite imagery has been growing in importance in many remote sensing applications, such as cartography, city modelling and reconstruction, as well as map generation. Most building extraction and polygoniza-tion methods rely on the vectorization of probability maps produced by a segmentation network. These approaches are not end-to-end learned, which means that imperfections and artifacts produced by the segmentation model are carried through the entire pipeline with the consequent generation of unregular polygons.
In this paper, we present a new way of tackling the build-ing polygonization problem. Rather than learning a seg-mentation network which is then followed by a polygoniza-tion method, we propose a novel neural network architec-Figure 1. Polygonal object extraction with PolyWorld. The method uses a CNN backbone to detect vertex candidates from an image, and aggregates the information of the visual descriptors ex-ploiting a graph neural network. The connections between vertices are generated solving a differentiable optimal transport problem. ture called PolyWorld that detects building corners from a satellite image and uses a learned matching procedure to connect them in order to form polygons. Thereby, our method allows the generation of valid polygons in an end-to-end fashion.
PolyWorld extracts positions and visual descriptors of building corners using a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and generates polygons by evaluating whether the connections between vertices are valid. This procedure
ﬁnds the best connection assignment between the detected vertex descriptors, which means that every corner must be matched with the subsequent vertex of the polygon. The connections between polygon vertices can be represented as the solution of a linear sum assignment problem. In Poly-World, an important role is played by a Graph Neural Net-work (GNN) that propagates global information through all the vertex embeddings, increasing the descriptors’ distinc-tiveness. Moreover, it reﬁnes the position of the detected corners in order to minimize the combined segmentation and polygonal angle difference loss. PolyWorld demon-strates superior performance compared to the state of the art building extraction and polygonization methods, not only achieving higher segmentation and detection results, but also producing more regular and clean building polygons. 2.