Abstract
Diffractive snapshot hyperspectral imaging based on the deep optics framework has been striving to capture the spectral images of dynamic scenes. However, existing deep optics frameworks all suffer from the mismatch between the optical hardware and the reconstruction algorithm due to the quantization operation in the diffractive optical element (DOE) fabrication, leading to the limited performance of hyperspectral imaging in practice. In this paper, we propose the quantization-aware deep optics for diffractive snapshot hyperspectral imaging. Our key observation is that common lithography techniques used in fabricating DOEs need to quantize the DOE height map to a few levels, and can freely set the height for each level. Therefore, we propose to inte-grate the quantization operation into the DOE height map optimization and design an adaptive mechanism to adjust the physical height of each quantization level. According to the optimization, we fabricate the quantized DOE directly and build a diffractive hyperspectral snapshot imaging sys-tem. Our method develops the deep optics framework to be more practical through the awareness of and adaptation to the quantization operation of the DOE physical structure, making the fabricated DOE and the reconstruction algo-rithm match each other systematically. Extensive synthetic simulation and real hardware experiments validate the su-perior performance of our method. 1.

Introduction
Hyperspectral imaging has been beneﬁcial to a plethora of sensing applications, from the fundamental research
ﬁelds, e.g., biomedical inspection, material analysis, and environmental monitoring [1, 4, 9, 27], to computer vision
∗Corresponding author: Lizhi Wang. applications, e.g. appearance acquisition, face recognition, and object tracking [13,32,46]. Conventional hyperspectral imaging systems scan scenes along either the spatial or the spectral dimensions and thus require multiple sensor expo-sures to capture a full hyperspectral image [21]. These sys-tems are unsuitable for measuring dynamic scenes, making snapshot hyperspectral imaging with just one sensor expo-sure one of the most attractive solutions.
Various snapshot hyperspectral imaging systems have been developed for capturing hyperspectral images of dy-namic scenes [3,11]. Classic methods based on geometrical optics mainly consist of a series of refractive or reﬂective optical elements [10, 25, 28, 41], being large in form fac-tor and thus suffering from the system complexity and cal-ibration difﬁculty. To overcome the limitations, diffractive snapshot hyperspectral imaging systems have been devel-oped by replacing the geometrical optical elements with a thin diffractive optical element (DOE) [6,18,22,33]. Funda-mentally, diffractive snapshot hyperspectral imaging needs to design the DOE height map for hyperspectral image en-coding and the reconstruction algorithm for hyperspectral image decoding. Previous methods try to design the DOE height map with hand-crafted or heuristic knowledge on the point spread function (PSF) but isolate the DOE hardware from the reconstruction algorithm [22]. Recently, the deep optics framework has been introduced with the core idea of an end-to-end optimization of optical hardware and the re-construction algorithm [12, 20, 29, 36, 37], which has been the most promising method in diffractive snapshot hyper-spectral imaging [5, 15].
The bottleneck in the deep optics framework is that the
DOE height map optimization does not model the phys-ical quantization in DOE fabrication. Existing deep op-tics frameworks all employ full precision (generally 32-bit ﬂoat) in DOE height map optimization and assume the same full precision in DOE fabrication. However, common
lithography techniques used in fabricating physical DOEs need to conﬁgure the quantization levels of the DOE height map [30]. Mature lithography techniques usually support no more than 16 quantization levels and only 4 quantization levels if high lithography stability is required. In this case, the DOE height map optimized with full precision has to be quantized during the physical fabrication. Thus, the fabri-cated DOE would deviate from the optimized DOE due to the quantization operation, which breaks the link and leads to a mismatch between the optical hardware and the recon-struction algorithm, reducing the energy of deep optics and limiting the performance of the diffractive snapshot hyper-spectral imaging.
In this paper, we propose the quantization-aware deep optics (QDO) for diffractive snapshot hyperspectral imag-ing. Speciﬁcally, We explicitly model the quantization op-eration during the DOE height map optimization, which is conducted together with the optimization of reconstruction algorithm, to bridge the gap between the DOE optimization and the DOE fabrication. By leveraging the fact that the
DOE height map of each quantization level can be freely set to be an arbitrary value within a speciﬁc range, we further propose an adaptive quantization-aware mechanism by ad-justing the physical height of each level during DOE height map optimization. Finally, we fabricate the DOE with the height map quantized according to the optimization and build a diffractive hyperspectral snapshot imaging system.
Our method develops the deep optics framework to be more practical through the awareness of and adaptation to the quantization operation of the DOE physical structure, making the fabricated DOE and the reconstruction algo-rithm match each other systematically. Extensive synthetic simulation and real hardware experiments validate the su-perior performance of our method.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose a quantization-aware deep optics model by jointly optimizing the quantized DOE and the re-construction algorithm for diffractive snapshot hyper-spectral imaging.
• We propose an adaptive mechanism by adjusting the physical height of each quantization level during DOE height map optimization to approximate the oracle per-formance with impossible full-precision fabrication.
• We fabricate the quantized DOE optimized by the pro-posed method and build a diffractive snapshot hyper-spectral imaging system. 2.