Abstract
In the paradigm of object detection, the decision head is an important part, which affects detection performance sig-nificantly. Yet how to design a high-performance decision head remains to be an open issue. In this paper, we pro-pose a novel approach to combine decision trees and deep neural networks in an end-to-end learning manner for ob-ject detection. First, we disentangle the decision choices and prediction values by plugging soft decision trees into neural networks. To facilitate effective learning, we pro-pose randomized decision routing with node selective and associative losses, which can boost the feature represen-tative learning and network decision simultaneously. Sec-ond, we develop the decision head for object detection with narrow branches to generate the routing probabilities and masks, for the purpose of obtaining divergent decisions from different nodes. We name this approach as the ran-domized decision routing for object detection, abbreviated as R(Det)2. Experiments on MS-COCO dataset demon-strate that R(Det)2 is effective to improve the detection per-formance. Equipped with existing detectors, it achieves 1.4 ∼ 3.6% AP improvement. 1.

Introduction
Object detection, which aims to recognize and localize the objects of interest in images, is a fundamental yet chal-lenging task in computer vision.
It is important for vari-ous applications, such as video surveillance, autonomous driving, and robotics vision. Due to its practical impor-tance, object detection has attracted significant attention in the community.
In recent decades, deep neural networks (DNNs) have brought significant progress into object de-tection. Typically, existing deep learning-based detection methods include one-stage detectors [22, 25, 31], two-stage detectors [1, 7, 16, 30, 33], end-to-end detectors [3, 39, 51].
Generally, current deep architectures constructed for ob-ject detection involve two components. One is the backbone
∗Corresponding author
Figure 1. Overview of the proposed approach. (a) Inspired by decision trees, we disentangle the decision choices and predictive values by introducing tree structure for decision head in object de-tection. With multi-node prediction, we can explore more diverse cues. (b) We use the soft probability to denote decision choices for different routes of nodes. The overall decision is the weighted sum of prediction values from different nodes. Specially, we propose randomized decision routing to learn divergent decisions from dif-ferent nodes for overall performance improvement. for feature extraction, which can be pre-trained with large-scale visual recognition datasets such as ImageNet [35].
The other is the decision head, which produces the pre-dictions for computing losses or inferring detection boxes.
Collaborated with region sampling, object detection can be converted into a multitask learning issue, where the decision tasks include classification and bounding box (bbox) regres-sion. For existing detection networks, the decision head is simply constructed by sequentially connecting several con-volution or fully-connected layers. For one-stage detectors, the decision head is commonly constructed by stacking sev-eral convolutional layers. The decision head for region pro-posal in two-stage detectors is similar. For two-stage detec-tors, the region-wise decision in R-CNN stage is typically implemented with 2 fully-connected layers. Since the deci-sion head is quite important for high-performance detectors, there are recently devoted researches [8, 12, 37, 43]. How-ever, most of these works focus on task disentanglement and
task-aware learning, leaving the universal decision mecha-nism far from exploitation.
Considering that the features from DNNs show great potential for high-level vision tasks, the simple design of widely-adopted single-node decision might impede the per-formance of object detection. A natural question arises: is single-node prediction good enough for feature exploration in object detection? To answer this, we focus on novel deci-sion mechanism and propose an approach to introduce soft decision trees into object detection. As in Figure 1, we in-tegrate soft decision trees to disentangle the routing choices and prediction values. To jointly learn the soft decision trees and neural networks in an end-to-end manner, we propose the randomized decision routing with the combination of so-called selective loss and associate loss. Experiments val-idate the effectiveness of the proposed approach and address the necessity of introducing multi-node predictions. Since our work is mainly on Randomized Decision routing for ob-ject Detection, we name it as R(Det)2. From the perspective of machine learning, our R(Det)2 is an attempt to bridge the neural networks and decision trees – two mainstream algo-rithms, which would bring insights into future research.
The contributions of this paper are three-fold.
• We propose to disentangle the route choices and pre-diction values for multi-node decision in object detec-In particular, we propose randomized decision tion. routing for the end-to-end joint learning of the tree-based decision head.
• We construct a novel decision head for object detec-tion, which introduces routing probabilities and masks to generate divergent decisions from multiple nodes for the overall decision boosting.
• Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of our proposed R(Det)2. In particular, R(Det)2 achieves over 3.6% of AP improvement when equipped with Faster
R-CNN. It improves the detection accuracy of large objects by a large margin as well. 2.