Abstract
Current Siamese-based trackers mainly formulate the vi-sual tracking into two independent subtasks, including clas-siﬁcation and localization. They learn the classiﬁcation subnetwork by processing each sample separately and ne-glect the relationship among positive and negative samples.
Moreover, such tracking paradigm takes only the classiﬁca-tion conﬁdence of proposals for the ﬁnal prediction, which may yield the misalignment between classiﬁcation and lo-calization. To resolve these issues, this paper proposes a ranking-based optimization algorithm to explore the rela-tionship among different proposals. To this end, we intro-duce two ranking losses, including the classiﬁcation one and the IoU-guided one, as optimization constraints. The classiﬁcation ranking loss can ensure that positive sam-ples rank higher than hard negative ones, i.e., distractors, so that the trackers can select the foreground samples suc-cessfully without being fooled by the distractors. The IoU-guided ranking loss aims to align classiﬁcation conﬁdence scores with the Intersection over Union(IoU) of the corre-sponding localization prediction for positive samples, en-abling the well-localized prediction to be represented by high classiﬁcation conﬁdence. Speciﬁcally, the proposed t-wo ranking losses are compatible with most Siamese track-ers and incur no additional computation for inference. Ex-tensive experiments on seven tracking benchmarks, includ-ing OTB100, UAV123, TC128, VOT2016, NFS30, GOT-10k and LaSOT, demonstrate the effectiveness of the pro-posed ranking-based optimization algorithm. The code and raw results are available at https://github.com/ sansanfree/RBO. 1.

Introduction
Visual object tracking aims to estimate the location in-formation of an arbitrary target in each frame of a video sequence. In most situations, only the initial target infor-∗Corresponding Author.
Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed two ranking losses. The clas-siﬁcation loss enables positive samples to rank higher than hard negative samples, aiming to suppress the classiﬁcation conﬁdence of distractors. The IoU ranking loss aims to align classiﬁcation with localization, i.e., that the samples with larger IoUs are ex-pected to gain higher classiﬁcation conﬁdence scores. mation is provided for trackers, then trackers are required to model the target appearance in the next frames. Since target-speciﬁc information is only available at test-time, the target model cannot be obtained via ofﬂine network train-ing.
Recently, many researchers exploit how to take the pow-er of deep learning technology to solve the tracking task.
Siamese network is one of the most popular deep learning paradigm. As pioneer work, SiamFC [1] formulates visual tracking into a deep target matching problem. To be spe-ciﬁc, SiamFC consists of two branches, i.e., target template and search region. Its former branch is used to model the target as a ﬁxed exemplar and the later branch processes the possible regions. SiamFC inspires many later tracker-s [26, 27, 46, 50] that are built upon the Siamese network ar-chitecture and can achieve state-of-the-art performance. A-mong them, SiamRPN introduces region proposal network-s(RPN) consisting of a classiﬁcation head for foreground-background discrimination and a regression head for an-chor reﬁnement. SiamRPN++ [26] and SiamFC++ [50] un-leash the capability of deeper backbone networks, such as
ResNet [21] and GoogleNet [37], to enhance feature rep-resentation.
Inspired by anchor-free object detectors like
FCOS [39] and CornerNet [25], many anchor-free tracker-s [8, 14, 18, 19] follow the pixel-wise prediction fashion to perform the target localization.
Although Siamese based trackers have achieved promis-ing performance, there still suffer from two limitations: (1) Siamese trackers have difﬁculty in distinguishing back-ground distractors. In particular, at the training stage, the classiﬁcation subnetwork is optimized by a large number of training samples, among which there exist vast uninforma-tive samples(i.e., easy sample) that can be easily classiﬁed while a handful of distracting examples are inundated and contribute to the minor effect on network optimization. At the test-time, although the most non-target samples could be discriminated by the trackers, a background distractor could heavily mislead the tracker when it has strong posi-tive conﬁdence, yielding tracking failure. (2) There exists the mismatch problem between classiﬁcation and localiza-tion as the two tasks are processed separately. More specif-ically, the classiﬁcation loss drives the model to distinguish the concerned target from background regardless of the lo-cation information, while the regression branch aims at lo-calizing the target’s bounding box for all positive samples without taking into account the classiﬁcation information.
As a result, well-localized proposals may have relatively lower foreground conﬁdence while the proposals with high foreground conﬁdence may yield low localization accuracy.
To resolve the above issues, we propose a ranking-based optimization(RBO) consisting of both classiﬁcation and IoU-guided ranking losses. The classiﬁcation loss is used to explicitly model the relationship between the pos-itive and hard negative samples. Actually, there are many diverse sample reweighing strategies to suppress the dis-tractors in object detection [4, 5, 30]. However, in the con-text of visual tracking, hard negative samples always have the same semantic class with the tracked target, and it is difﬁcult to discriminate the distractors in the classiﬁcation embedding space. Differently, as shown in Figure 1(a), we tackle the classiﬁcation as a ranking task where the fore-ground samples are encouraged to rank higher than back-ground samples. Compared with the original classiﬁcation loss, the proposed ranking optimization serves a loose con-straint, under which hard negative samples are allowed to be classiﬁed as the foreground as long as their foreground con-ﬁdence scores are lower than those of positive ones, and can well prevent the tracker from being fooled by distractors.
Actually, the misalignment problem between classiﬁcation and localization was studied in object detection [31, 43, 55], inspired by which we propose an IoU-guided ranking loss on the basis of RankDetNet [31] to align the foreground conﬁdence scores of with their corresponding IoU values as shown by Figure 1(b). The modiﬁed loss is more suitable for tracking task, which enables classiﬁcation conﬁdence to be localization-sensitive to some extent.
To verify the effectiveness of the proposed ranking-based optimization, we choose anchor-based SiamRPN++ [26] and anchor-free SiamBAN [8] trackers as baselines, and craft our SiamRPN++-RBO and SiamBAN-RBO trackers, respectively. Moreover, recent works propose diverse pixel-wise correlation ways to calculate the similarity between the exemplar and search images [17, 18, 29]. Inspired by them, we modify the SiamBAN-RBO by replacing the depth-wise correlation with the pixel-wise correlation, obtaining a new tracker version called SiamPW-RBO. The main contribu-tions of this paper are summarized as follows.
• We devise a classiﬁcation ranking loss to enhance the discrimination capability by modeling the relationship between foreground samples and background ones, which prevents the tracker from being fooled by dis-tractors.
• We propose an IoU-guided ranking loss to alleviate the mismatch problem between classiﬁcation and localiza-tion. It connects two independent subtasks by aligning the classiﬁcation score with associated IoU, ensuring that well-localized prediction could be represented by high classiﬁcation conﬁdence score.
• The proposed RBO can signiﬁcantly improve the per-formance of three types of trackers on seven diverse benchmarks without sacriﬁcing inference speed com-pared with baseline trackers. 2.