Abstract
Magnetic Resonance Imaging can produce detailed im-ages of the anatomy and physiology of the human body that can assist doctors in diagnosing and treating pathologies such as tumours. However, MRI suffers from very long ac-quisition times that make it susceptible to patient motion artifacts and limit its potential to deliver dynamic treat-ments. Conventional approaches such as Parallel Imag-ing and Compressed Sensing allow for an increase in MRI acquisition speed by reconstructing MR images from sub-sampled MRI data acquired using multiple receiver coils.
Recent advancements in Deep Learning combined with Par-allel Imaging and Compressed Sensing techniques have the potential to produce high-ﬁdelity reconstructions from highly accelerated MRI data.
In this work we present a novel Deep Learning-based Inverse Problem solver ap-plied to the task of Accelerated MRI Reconstruction, called the Recurrent Variational Network (RecurrentVarNet), by exploiting the properties of Convolutional Recurrent Neu-ral Networks and unrolled algorithms for solving Inverse
Problems. The RecurrentVarNet consists of multiple recur-rent blocks, each responsible for one iteration of the un-rolled variational optimization scheme for solving the in-verse problem of multi-coil Accelerated MRI Reconstruc-tion. Contrary to traditional approaches, the optimization steps are performed in the observation domain (k-space) instead of the image domain. Each block of the Recur-rentVarNet reﬁnes the observed k-space and comprises a data consistency term and a recurrent unit which takes as input a learned hidden state and the prediction of the previous block. Our proposed method achieves new state of the art qualitative and quantitative reconstruction re-sults on 5-fold and 10-fold accelerated data from a pub-lic multi-coil brain dataset, outperforming previous conven-tional and deep learning-based approaches. Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/NKI-AI/direct.
Figure 1. Overview of our proposed framework, Recurrent Varia-tional Network (RecurrentVarNet), applied to the task of multi-coil Accelerated MRI Reconstruction. Our model takes as input sub-sampled MRI data from multiple coils which are reﬁned fol-lowing an iterative gradient descent-like optimization scheme of
T time-steps in the k-space, and outputs an estimate of the ground truth reconstructed image. 1.

Introduction
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is one of the most vastly used imaging modalities in medicine. Since MRI al-lows for production of highly detailed anatomical images of the human body, it is often employed for disease de-tection, prognosis, and treatment monitoring and guidance.
The facts that MRI is non-invasive and that it does not in-volve exposure to ionizing radiation have played a pivotal role in making it a popular imaging technique.
However, MRI is still bounded by very lengthy acqui-sition times induced by the fact that the MRI scanner reads data in the frequency domain (k-space) sequentially in time.
This usually causes patient discomfort and motion artifacts, and it also limits its use for delivery of dynamic treatments such as image-guided radiotherapy. Therefore, reducing the scanning time in MRI, often referred to as accelerat-ing MRI [42], not only could assist in reducing medical costs and patients’ distress, but could also make dynamic treatments feasible. Conventional approaches for acceler-ating MRI include Parallel Imaging (PI) [16, 21, 29], Com-pressed Sensing (CS) [6, 20], and the combination of these
two methods (PI-CS) [26].
In contrast to traditional MRI acquisitions, in PI multi-ple, instead of one, radio-frequency receiver coils are em-ployed to simultaneously obtain reduced sets of measure-ments to shorten the acquisition time. Coil sensitivity maps are required to be known since each coil is sensitive to a different part of the volume according to its position. Clas-sical approaches for estimating these coil sensitivity maps include E-SPIRiT [38], SENSE [23,30], GRAPPA [10], and
SMASH [34].
Besides PI, CS techniques aim in accelerating the MRI acquisition by sub-sampling the k-space, that is, acquiring sparse or partial raw k-space measurements. Unfortunately, this is accompanied by a degradation of image quality, known as aliasing artifacts, which include low-resolution images, blurring, or in-folding artifacts [24]. This is at-tributed to the fact that this violates the Nyquist-Shannon sampling criterion [9,33]. In CS, an acceleration factor R is chosen which determines the magnitude of the acceleration, and is referred to as R-fold acceleration. R is calculated as the ratio of the number of k-space measurements needed for a full scan over the number of the acquired measurements.
Recent advancements in Deep Learning (DL) and specif-ically in Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), have led to their application in many ﬁelds including solving inverse problems arising in imaging, such as Accelerated MRI Re-construction tasks. Combined with PI-CS, DL-based meth-ods can outperform conventional PI and CS approaches by producing reconstructed MR images with less artifacts [4].
Additionally, in 2018-19 the fastMRI [25, 42] and Calgary-Campinas [3] challenges, have provided the MRI commu-nity with publicly available raw MRI data enabling the de-velopment of multiple DL state of the art baselines for pro-ducing faithful reconstructed images from sub-sampled k-space measurements [7, 13, 22, 32, 37].
Motivated by the need to accelerate the MRI acquisi-tion even further, in this work we propose a novel CNN and recurrent-based DL inverse problem solver inspired by the Variational Network [11] and the Recurrent Inference
Machine [31] approaches which we apply on the task of re-constructing images from accelerated MRI data. We call our proposed method the Recurrent Variational Network.
Contributions.
• We propose the Recurrent Variational Network, a novel
Deep Learning architecture for solving imaging inverse problems. We applied our method to the multi-coil ac-celerated MRI reconstruction task.
• We are the ﬁrst to present a recurrent-based DL imaging inverse problem solver that performs iterative optimiza-tion in the measurements (k-space) domain.
• Our quantitative and qualitative experiments demonstrate that our model achieved state of the art results on the
Calgary-Campinas public brain dataset outperforming current baselines. 2.