Abstract
The inherent challenge of detecting symmetries stems from arbitrary orientations of symmetry patterns; a reﬂec-tion symmetry mirrors itself against an axis with a speciﬁc orientation while a rotation symmetry matches its rotated copy with a speciﬁc orientation. Discovering such symme-try patterns from an image thus beneﬁts from an equivari-ant feature representation, which varies consistently with reﬂection and rotation of the image. In this work, we intro-duce a group-equivariant convolutional network for sym-metry detection, dubbed EquiSym, which leverages equiv-ariant feature maps with respect to a dihedral group of re-ﬂection and rotation. The proposed network is built end-to-end with dihedrally-equivariant layers and trained to out-put a spatial map for reﬂection axes or rotation centers.
We also present a new dataset, DENse and DIverse symme-try (DENDI), which mitigates limitations of existing bench-marks for reﬂection and rotation symmetry detection. Ex-periments show that our method achieves the state of the arts in symmetry detection on LDRS and DENDI datasets. 1.

Introduction
From molecules to galaxies, from nature to man-made environments, symmetry is everywhere. Comprehensive perception and exploitation of real-world symmetry are the instinctive abilities of humans and animals that have the po-tential to take intelligent systems to the next level. The fo-cus of this paper is on the two most primitive symmetries, reﬂection and rotation symmetries. The goal of reﬂection and rotation symmetry detection is to ﬁnd a reﬂection axis and a rotation center that remain invariant under reﬂection and rotation, respectively. Despite decades of efforts [29, 46], symmetry detection methods have been limited to the well-deﬁned symmetry patterns, and the remedy for real-world symmetry is still yet to be thoroughly explored. The simplicity of mathematical concepts of symmetry encour-aged early approaches to ﬁnd keypoint pairs that satisfy pre-deﬁned constraints for symmetry [1,3,32,37,39,43],
Figure 1. Symmetry detection examples of our method EquiSym. (a) an input image, (b) a score map of reﬂection symmetry axes, and (c) that of rotation symmetry centers. Best viewed in color. which leverage hand-crafted local feature descriptors to de-tect sparse symmetry patterns. Recently, convolutional neu-ral networks (CNNs) have been successfully applied to de-tect reﬂection symmetry and have surpassed the previous methods by learning score map regression [13] or symmet-ric matching [38] from data.
The primary challenge in detecting symmetry patterns lies in the fact that a symmetry manifests itself with an ar-bitrary orientation and perceiving the pattern requires an analysis based on the orientation; a reﬂection symmetry mirrors itself against an axis with a speciﬁc orientation and a rotation symmetry matches its rotated copy with a speciﬁc orientation. Most methods for symmetry detec-tion thus involve searching over the space of candidate orientations of symmetry patterns and also developing a robust representation that is either invariant or equivari-ant with respect to rotation and reﬂection. The early ap-proaches leverage an equivariant representation by extract-ing oriented keypoints and performing orientation normal-ization [1,32,37,39,43]. While this technique has proven ef-fective for shallow gradient-based features, it cannot be ap-plied to deep feature maps from standard neural networks, where rotation and reﬂection induce unpredictable varia-tions in representation.
To address the challenge, we propose to learn a group-equivariant convolutional neural network for reﬂection and rotation symmetry detection, dubbed EquiSym. Recently, there has been active research on equivariant networks to incorporate equivariance explicitly for robust and sample-efﬁcient representation learning [7,9,19,40,44,47]. Un-like standard neural networks, they induce predictable and structure-preserving representation with respect to the geo-metric transformations, e.g., rotation or reﬂection, which is eminently suitable for symmetry detection. To detect con-sistent symmetry patterns over different orientations, we build a dihedrally-equivariant convolutional network [44], which is designed to be end-to-end equivariant to a group of reﬂection and rotation. The network effectively learns to output a score map of reﬂection axes for reﬂection symme-try or that of rotation centers for rotation symmetry.
We also present a new dataset, DENse and DIverse symmetry (DENDI), for reﬂection and rotation symmetry detection. DENDI contains real-world images with ac-curate and clean annotations for reﬂection and rotation symmetries and mitigates limitations of existing bench-marks [4,12,13,27,38]. First, the reﬂection symmetry axes are diverse in scale and orientation, while previous datasets mostly focus on the dominant axes of the vertical or hori-zontal ones. Second, the rotation centers are annotated to the objects in polygon and ellipse shape, not limited to the circular objects. Third, the number of the rotation folds for each rotation center is annotated, which is the ﬁrst in a large-scale dataset. Finally, the number of images is 1.7x and 2.0x larger than the second-largest reﬂection and rota-tion symmetry detection datasets, respectively.
The contribution of our work can be summarized as:
• We propose a novel group-equivariant symmetry de-tection network, EquiSym, which outputs group-equivariant score maps for reﬂection axes or rota-tion centers via end-to-end reﬂection- and rotation-equivariant feature maps.
• We present a new dataset, DENse and DIverse symme-try dataset (DENDI), containing images of reﬂection and rotation symmetries annotated in a broader range of typical real-world objects.
• We show the outstanding performance of EquiSym in reﬂection symmetry detection on SDRW [27],
LDRS [38], and DENDI, and in rotation symmetry de-tection on DENDI. 2.