Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of document image de-warping, which aims at eliminating the geometric distortion in document images for document digitization. Instead of designing a better neural network to approximate the opti-cal flow fields between the inputs and outputs, we pursue the best readability by taking the text lines and the document boundaries into account from a constrained optimization perspective. Specifically, our proposed method first learns the boundary points and the pixels in the text lines and then follows the most simple observation that the bound-aries and text lines in both horizontal and vertical directions should be kept after dewarping to introduce a novel grid regularization scheme. To obtain the final forward mapping for dewarping, we solve an optimization problem with our proposed grid regularization. The experiments comprehen-sively demonstrate that our proposed approach outperforms the prior arts by large margins in terms of readability (with the metrics of Character Errors Rate and the Edit Distance) while maintaining the best image quality on the publicly-available DocUNet benchmark. 1.

Introduction
The technologies of document digitization (DocDig) have largely facilitated our daily lives by transferring the information written in paper sheets from the physical world to electronic devices. Since the paper sheets are thin, frag-ile and easily-deformed, it is usually required to carefully capture document images of paper sheets with the scan-ners to avoid unexpected deformation of papers for digitiza-tion. Such a pipeline works well to some extent, however, it quickly loses efficiency when we are using handheld mo-bile devices, e.g., smartphones, for fast, painless but accu-rate document digitization. Therefore, the communities of computer vision and document analysis have been making efforts on getting rid of the restriction of DocDig by study-ing the problem of document image dewarping.
There is a rich history for the problem of document im-*Equal Contribution
†Correspondence Author (a) Input Image (b) DocUNet [27] (c) DewarpNet [10] (d) Geometric Element (e) Deformation Grid
Figure 1. Our method leverages the geometric information of text lines and document boundaries to generate a deformation grid which effectively reduces the error rate of character recognition. (f) Our Result age dewarping. In the early pioneering works [2,31,35], this problem was formulated as surface reconstruction from dif-ferent imaging configurations including multi-view images, binocular cameras as well as structured-lightning depth sen-sors, achieving accurate results in the lab environment while remaining issues for practical usage. Subsequently, the prior knowledge of paper-sheets in single-view images was extensively studied by detecting the boundaries [5], text lines [17, 18], structured lights [31], and so on [37] in the pre-deep-learning era. As those approaches depend on the detected prior knowledge, they are limited by the detection quality of those low-level visual cues, thus posing an issue of accuracy for the dewarping.
With the resurgence of deep learning in recent years, convolutional neural networks (ConvNets) have also been used for dewarping document image by learning the defor-mation field between the distorted input images and the ex-pected flattened ones [10,11,21,27,28,39] under various su-pervision signals such as the synthetic data annotations [27],
ular terms used in image rectification approaches and come up with a novel grid generation method that bet-ter optimizes the quality of the deformation gird.
• The proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art per-formance on the DocUNet benchmark, demonstrating the effectiveness of the grid regularization term. 2.