Abstract
Interpreting objects with basic geometric primitives has long been studied in computer vision. Among geometric primitives, superquadrics are well known for their abil-ity to represent a wide range of shapes with few parame-ters. However, as the first and foremost step, recovering superquadrics accurately and robustly from 3D data still re-mains challenging. The existing methods are subject to lo-cal optima and sensitive to noise and outliers in real-world scenarios, resulting in frequent failure in capturing geomet-ric shapes. In this paper, we propose the first probabilistic method to recover superquadrics from point clouds. Our method builds a Gaussian-uniform mixture model (GUM) on the parametric surface of a superquadric, which explic-itly models the generation of outliers and noise. The su-perquadric recovery is formulated as a Maximum Likeli-hood Estimation (MLE) problem. We propose an algorithm,
Expectation, Maximization, and Switching (EMS), to solve this problem, where: (1) outliers are predicted from the pos-terior perspective; (2) the superquadric parameter is opti-mized by the trust-region reflective algorithm; and (3) lo-cal optima are avoided by globally searching and switch-ing among parameters encoding similar superquadrics.
We show that our method can be extended to the multi-superquadrics recovery for complex objects. The proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art in terms of accu-racy, efficiency, and robustness on both synthetic and real-world datasets. The code is at http://github.com/ bmlklwx/EMS-superquadric_fitting.git. 1.

Introduction
Understanding 3D environments (and the objects therein) has been a crucial task for computer vision and in-telligent systems [24]. With the recent breakthroughs in 3D vision and the advancement of computing power, modern computer vision systems are able to reconstruct and reason about scenes with low-level representations, such as point
*Corresponding author
Figure 1. (a) Shape vocabulary of convex superquadrics. We focus on the interpretation of point clouds with convex superquadrics. (b) Superquadric representations inferred by our method. clouds [11, 25, 26], meshes [18] and voxels [9, 38]. In con-trast, the human visual system favors abstracting scenes into canonical parts for a better perceptual understanding [3,15].
Human vision seems to work well with basic geometric structures of the scene, and not rely on detailed point-wise models [24]. Therefore, understanding the geometric struc-ture of visual inputs appears to be a promising approach for intelligent systems to achieve high-level goals such as physical reasoning, decision making, planning and interac-tion with the environment. Inspired by this idea, researchers turned to exploring the possibility of using basic volumetric primitives for object description, e.g., cuboids [20, 33, 39].
However, due to the limited expressiveness of cuboids, ob-jects can only be describe in a highly abstracted way.
Superquadrics are a family of geometric primitives with a rich shape vocabulary, including cuboids, cylinders, el-lipsoids, octahedra and their intermediates (Fig. 1), but only encoded by 5 parameters. In the recent few years, su-perquadrics have raised considerable attention in the com-munity and are widely applied in robotics and computer vi-sion tasks, e.g., object modeling [5, 22, 23], collision de-tection and motion planning [28, 29], pose estimation [4], and grasping [27, 36, 37]. A single superquadric is already expressive enough to reasonably model many everyday ob-jects [14, 30]. The pioneering work on single superquadric recovery includes [1, 12, 32], where the recovery is formu-lated as a Least-Square (LSQ) problem. In [6,16], the meth-ods are extended to model complex objects with multiple superquadrics. However, the existing methods are vulnera-ble to noise and outliers, and the inherent deficiency of the local optimizer makes them sensitive to initialization.
In this paper, we focus on the single superquadric recov-ery problem and propose the first probabilistic method to recover superquadrics from noisy point clouds. We build a probabilistic model to simulate how observations (point cloud) are possibly generated from a given parameterized superquadric surface. GUM is adopted to accommodate the generation of noise and outliers. The superquadric recov-ery is thus formulated as a MLE problem (Sec. 3.1). Ex-pectation and Maximization (EM) algorithm is most com-monly used to solve MLE problems with latent variables
[10]. However, the EM algorithm typically converge to a local optimum, resulting in an inaccurate shape approxi-mation. To solve this problem, we propose a novel algo-rithm, Expectation, Maximization and Switch (EMS), which takes advantage of the geometric features of superquadrics to avoid local optima (Sec. 3.2). In the E-step, the prob-ability of a point being an outlier is inferred from a pos-terior perspective (Sec. 3.3). In the M-step, the parame-ter of the superquadric is updated given the current estima-tion of the latent variables in the E-step (Sec. 3.4). The
E and M-step alternate until converged to a local optimum, where we introduce the S-step: globally search for candi-date parameters encoding similar superquadrics in terms of shape and pose, and then switch to the one from which we can further increase the likelihood (Sec. 3.5). This strat-egy is made possible by investigating the geometric symme-try and algebraic ambiguity of superquadrics. Furthermore, we show our probabilistic formulation can be extended to multi-superquadrics recovery tasks (Sec. 3.6).
The motivations and key features of this paper come from the two following questions. (1) Can we design an algorithm robust, accurate and efficient enough to abstract an optimal superquadric primitive from a noisy point cloud whose underlying shape is indeed within the vocabulary of superquadrics? This question is answered in Sec. 4.1 and
Sec. 4.2. (2) If the point cloud is too complex to be approx-imate by a single superquadric, can the algorithm figure out a major part which can be approximated by a superquadric?
This is a challenging goal which cannot be achieved by any existing single superquadric recovery algorithm. We demonstrate qualitatively that the proposed method is capa-ble of doing this in Sec. 4.3. 2.