Abstract
Deep networks provide state-of-the-art performance in multiple imaging inverse problems ranging from medical imaging to computational photography. However, most ex-isting networks are trained with clean signals which are often hard or impossible to obtain. Equivariant imaging (EI) is a recent self-supervised learning framework that ex-ploits the group invariance present in signal distributions to learn a reconstruction function from partial measure-ment data alone. While EI results are impressive, its per-formance degrades with increasing noise.
In this paper, we propose a Robust Equivariant Imaging (REI) framework which can learn to image from noisy partial measurements alone. The proposed method uses Stein’s Unbiased Risk
Estimator (SURE) to obtain a fully unsupervised training loss that is robust to noise. We show that REI leads to considerable performance gains on linear and nonlinear inverse problems, thereby paving the way for robust unsu-pervised imaging with deep networks. Code is available at https://github.com/edongdongchen/REI. 1.

Introduction
Inverse problems play a fundamental role in com-puter vision and signal processing. Applications such as computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), super-resolution and image inpainting have been ex-tensively explored. The goal in an inverse problem is to re-construct a signal x ∈ Rn from measurements y ∈ Rm, that is inverting the forward process y = A(x) + ϵ, (1) which is generally a challenging task due to the noise ϵ and the ill-conditioned or rank deficient forward operator A (e.g., m < n). Traditional approaches exploit prior knowl-edge about x (sparsity [10], total variation [36] or more re-*The first two authors have contributed equally to this paper.
Figure 1. REI vs EI: EI is not robust to noise and the performance degrades with increasing noise. From top to bottom: reconstruc-tions of EI, supervised (Sup) baseline, and the proposed REI on 4× accelerated MRI with Gaussian noise level σ = 0.01, 0.1, 0.2.
PSNR values are shown in the top right corner of the images. cently the deep image prior [39]) to regularize the recon-structions. A different approach is taken by more recent end-to-end learning solutions [17] which aim to learn the inverse mapping directly from (x, y) pairs. However, in many inverse problems, it is expensive or impossible to ob-tain clean signals x, and only noisy measurement data y are available for training.
Without any assumptions on the signal distribution, it is fundamentally impossible to learn the reconstruction map-ping from partial measurements alone, as there are infinitely many inverses for each observed measurement y [4, 10].
Some unsupervised methods alleviate this limitation by us-ing multiple forward operators [1, 9, 32], however this set-ting is not often met in practice. Recently, the EI frame-work [4] showed that learning from partial measurements y is possible if the underlying signal set is invariant to transformations, such as shifts or rotations. The EI strat-egy offers an elegant way to learn the model in a self-supervised fashion, as most natural signals present certain invariances (e.g., invariance to translations and rotations in images). EI was shown to achieve similar performance to supervised methods on a number of noiseless image recon-struction tasks such as sparse-view CT and image inpaint-ing. However, as shown in Figure 1, EI’s performance de-grades rapidly in the presence of measurement noise.
In this paper, we propose a novel robust EI (REI) framework which can learn from only noisy measurements data. In particular, we use Stein’s Unbiased Risk Estima-tor (SURE) [38] to derive an unsupervised loss that takes into account the noise present in the measurements. The proposed learning method is architecture agnostic and can handle a wide range of different noise models, including
Gaussian noise, Poisson noise and mixed Poisson-Gaussian noise. We experimentally show that our REI method out-performs the vanilla EI for all noise levels in 3 inverse prob-lems: sparse-view CT, accelerated MRI and image inpaint-ing. In summary, our contributions are as follows: 1. We present a new end-to-end unsupervised learning framework for training deep networks to solve imag-ing problems from noisy partial measurements alone. 2. Our REI learning framework can handle a wide range of the most frequently encountered noise models in practice, including: Gaussian noise, Poisson noise, and mixed Gaussian-Poisson noise. 3. We evaluate the proposed method on accelerated MRI, image inpainting, and a nonlinear imaging model for sparse-view CT, showing substantial improvements over vanilla EI in the presence of noise and approach-ing the quality of reconstructions trained with ground truth data using supervised learning. 2.