Abstract
Deep semi-supervised learning (SSL) methods aim to take advantage of abundant unlabeled data to improve the algorithm performance. In this paper, we consider the prob-lem of safe SSL scenario where unseen-class instances ap-pear in the unlabeled data. This setting is essential and commonly appears in a variety of real applications. One intuitive solution is removing these unseen-class instances after detecting them during the SSL process. Neverthe-less, the performance of unseen-class identification is lim-ited by the small number of labeled data and ignoring the availability of unlabeled data. To take advantage of these unseen-class data and ensure performance, we pro-pose a safe SSL method called SAFE-STUDENT from the teacher-student view. Firstly, a new scoring function called energy-discrepancy (ED) is proposed to help the teacher model improve the security of instances selection. Then, a novel unseen-class label distribution learning mechanism mitigates the unseen-class perturbation by calibrating the unseen-class label distribution. Finally, we propose an iter-ative optimization strategy to facilitate teacher-student net-work learning. Extensive studies on several representa-tive datasets show that SAFE-STUDENT remarkably out-performs the state-of-the-art, verifying the feasibility and robustness of our method in the under-explored problem. 1.

Introduction
The recent remarkable success of deep learning methods attributes to the advancements of learning algorithms and the availability of large-scale labeled data [17, 30]. How-ever, large-scale annotated data is scarce and costly to col-*Contribute to this work equally
†Corresponding author lect for various real-world applications, such as medical im-age analysis [12, 29] and image classification [14, 27]. In contrast, unlabeled data is plentiful and cheap to collect, stimulating the great research interest of SSL. Currently, the research of deep SSL methods can be categorized into three main branches: consistency regularization [18,31,33], pseudo-labeling [3, 30, 36], and hybrid methods [1, 2, 32].
Although current deep SSL methods can enhance the performance of learning models, the prerequisite is that the unlabeled set derives from the identical distribution with the labeled set. Once this condition is not satisfied in real sce-narios, the performance of SSL models degenerates signif-icantly [4, 9, 27]. Many real-world tasks involve the situ-ation where unlabeled data contains some unseen-class in-stances. For example, at the beginning stage of the out-break of COVID-19, the unlabeled data inevitably con-tains some imperceptible COVID-19 instances in the deep
SSL pneumonia classification [11]. These unseen-class in-stances heavily hinder the safety of the pneumonia clas-sification model. We define this case as the problem of
Safe Deep semi-supervised learning with Unseen-class un-labeled data (SDU), which accommodates a variety of real-world applications but is rarely considered in the literature.
Considering the unseen-class instances contained in un-labeled data hurt the performance of seen-class classifica-tion easily, one intuitive way is to detect these unseen-class instances by unseen-class identification methods, re-move them, and then use any existing SSL method to obtain promising performance. Nevertheless, the performance of unseen-class identification is limited by the small number of labeled data. Several deep safe SSL methods are proposed to alleviate the limitations [3, 4, 9, 37]. These deep safe SSL methods select reliable seen-class instances from unlabeled data to increase the number of labeled seen-class instances.
However, the selected seen-class instances are inaccurate due to limited identification ability and the lack of suit-2.