Abstract
Weakly supervised object detection (WSOD) has recently attracted much attention. However, the lack of bounding-box supervision makes its accuracy much lower than fully supervised object detection (FSOD), and currently modern
FSOD techniques cannot be applied to WSOD. To bridge the performance and technical gaps between WSOD and
FSOD, this paper proposes a new framework, Salvage of
Supervision (SoS), with the key idea being to harness ev-ery potentially useful supervisory signal in WSOD: the weak image-level labels, the pseudo-labels, and the power of semi-supervised object detection. This paper proposes new approaches to utilize these weak and noisy signals effectively, and shows that each type of supervisory sig-nal brings in notable improvements, outperforms existing
WSOD methods (which mainly use only the weak labels) by large margins. The proposed SoS-WSOD method also has the ability to freely use modern FSOD techniques. SoS-WSOD achieves 64.4 mAP50 on VOC2007, 61.9 mAP50 on
VOC2012 and 16.6 mAP50:95 on MS-COCO, and also has fast inference speed. Ablations and visualization further verify the effectiveness of SoS. 1.

Introduction
Large-scale datasets with precise annotations are critical in developing detection algorithms, but are expensive to ob-tain. Thus, weakly supervised object detection (WSOD), which only needs image-level labels on training images, is popular these days. WSOD has borrowed ideas from fully supervised object detection (FSOD), such as object proposals [2, 33] and the Fast-RCNN framework [10]. But modern FSOD has discarded external object proposals and has developed better techniques like Faster-RCNN [24] and
FPN [20]. Furthermore, current WSOD methods mostly use
VGG16 [28] as the backbone and Fast-RCNN [10] as the
*J. Wu is the corresponding author. This research was partly sup-ported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61772256 and Grant 61921006. detector, which confines both accuracy and speed. That is, due to the lack of detailed box-level annotations, WSOD cannot enjoy the progress from FSOD. In fact, it has been shown that modern FSOD techniques such as ResNet back-bones and RoIAlign will even deteriorate WSOD detec-tors [27]. The weak image-level label is often the only su-pervisory signal utilized for object detection in WSOD, by resorting to a multi-instance recognition setup [4].
In this paper, we argue that WSOD must fight hard to harness every potential source of supervisory signal, and should find a way to utilize the progress in FSOD. The proposed Salvage of Supervision (SoS) framework (SoS-WSOD) is illustrated in Fig. 1, which has 3 stages. Stage 1 trains a detector with any WSOD method, and we propose an improved OICR [32] as our stage 1. Stage 2 is pseudo-FSOD, where the difficulty is to generate good pseudo box-level annotations in order to boost performance and adopt newer FSOD techniques (e.g., ResNet [13], RoIAlign [12], and FPN [20]), i.e., to salvage the supervision. This prob-lem has been largely ignored in WSOD, for which we pro-pose a simple but effective solution. Stage 3 is proposed by us, named as SSOD, in which we split the whole dataset into a “clean” and a “noisy” part, then treat the noisy part as unlabeled. That is, we salvage additional useful supervi-sory signals by creating a semi-supervised object detection (SSOD) problem. Hence, we have salvaged supervisory sig-nals out of weak labels by designing novel algorithms to generate high-quality pseudo box-level labels and by creat-ing a semi-supervised learning problem, respectively.
Compared to existing WSOD methods, our SoS-WSOD not only harnesses every potentially useful supervisory sig-nal, but also enables WSOD to fully enjoy both accuracy and speed benefits of modern FSOD methods. Although pseudo FSOD has been tried [6,9,32,41], we will show that
SoS-WSOD salvages pseudo-supervision of much higher quality. Hence, our contributions are:
• We propose SoS-WSOD, a new WSOD framework, showing that we must harness all potential supervi-sory signals in WSOD: generate high-quality pseudo-annotations for FSOD, and treat the generated pseudo-Figure 1. The SoS-WSOD pipeline. Stage 1 trains a weakly supervised detector with only image-level labels. We design PGF to filter its detection results and to generate high-quality pseudo box-level annotations in stage 2, which enables us to train a fully supervised detector.
Stage 3 splits the training set into “clean” and unlabeled “noisy” parts, and trains a detector in a semi-supervised manner. label dataset as a noisy dataset to utilize SSOD.
• We show that although existing WSOD methods lag far behind FSOD in terms of both accuracy and technique, it is very beneficial and feasible to fill this gap. Our pseudo-FSOD enjoys the benefits of all modern FSOD techniques in WSOD, and achieves both higher accuracy and faster speed.
• We improve WSOD accuracy by large margins, with 64.4 mAP50 on VOC2007, 61.9 mAP50 on VOC2012, and 16.6 mAP50:95 on MS-COCO. Besides, SoS-WSOD also has fast detection speed. 2.