Abstract
GS image
RS image rectiﬁed RS image
Cameras on portable devices are manufactured with a rolling-shutter (RS) mechanism, where the image rows (aka. scanlines) are read out sequentially. The unknown cam-era motions during the imaging process cause the so-called
RS effects which are solved by motion assumptions in the literature.
In this work, we give a solution to the abso-lute pose problem free of motion assumptions. We cate-gorically demonstrate that the only requirement is motion smoothness instead of stronger constraints on the camera motion. To this end, we propose a novel mathematical ab-straction for RS cameras observing a planar scene, called the scanline-homography, a 3 × 2 matrix with 5 DOFs. We establish the relationship between a scanline-homography and the corresponding plane-homography, a 3 × 3 ma-trix with 6 DOFs assuming the camera is calibrated. We estimate the scanline-homographies of an RS frame us-ing a smooth image warp powered by B-Splines, and re-cover the plane-homographies afterwards to obtain the scanline-poses based on motion smoothness. We back our claims with various experiments. Code and new datasets: https: / / bitbucket.org/ clermontferrand / planarscanlinehomography/src/master/. 1.

Introduction
Many portable devices use cameras based on CMOS sen-sors equipped with a rolling-shutter (RS) mechanism, ow-ing to its low-power consumption, low-price and high frame rate. In RS cameras, each scanline is exposed and read out sequentially [14] during imaging. This is different from cameras based on CCD sensors which mostly use a global-shutter (GS) mechanism that reads out all pixel rows at the same time. The RS mechanism becomes troublesome when imaging highly dynamic environments or when the camera itself undergoes high-speed motions when reading out those scanlines. In general, the effects are two-folds: 1) An RS camera violates the conventional pinhole cam-*Equal contribution, †Corresponding author
Figure 1. RS image rectiﬁcation using a GS image as the template. era model used in most vision algorithms [17], as most of them are derived based on the GS and the pinhole camera model [16]. 2) An RS camera can generate images with unintended artefacts, e.g., distortion and blur.
The ﬁrst effect leads to research in RS geometry [9, 14, 26, 43] and the second effect to methods for RS image rectiﬁcation [15, 27, 38, 40]; see section 2 for a review.
All these works, with a few exceptions [28], are based on certain types of motion assumptions, e.g., kinematic models [6, 9, 26, 43, 45], trajectory ﬁtting with polynomi-als [35, 37, 40] and B-Splines [13, 21, 30, 33, 34], pose inter-polation [12, 17, 38], or homography mixtures [15].
In this paper, we tackle the RS absolute pose problem, that is to estimate all the scanline poses from a single RS image given a template and RS image rectiﬁcation. We speciﬁcally consider the case of planar objects, where the template is a 2D Euclidean object model [1, 2, 4, 6, 23, 31].
This problem admits a closed-form solution by using a con-stant kinematic motion model [1]. However, as we shall show in this paper, it is not trivial at all to solve the problem without motion assumptions. In this work, we only require the camera motion to be smooth; this stems from the RS im-age being a time-coherent set of scanlines rather than jagged fragments. Aside from this, we do not impose any assump-tion on the actual type of motion the camera undergoes, i.e.,
the motion can be simple kinematics, complicated dynam-ics, or even random movements as arbitrary as noise.
In addition, we extend the template class to include the case of a GS image photoed by a camera whose principal axis is orthogonal to the planar scene (see Fig. 1) which is easy to obtain in practice.
Recently, there has been work [28] attempting to explain an RS image as a deformed GS image, based on isomet-ric and conformal shape-from-template (SfT) methods [8].
The underlying idea is that as the RS goes along a certain direction, say the y-direction from top to bottom, the de-formation along the x-direction preserves relative distances, resulting in a conformal deformation constraint along the x-direction. However, a general (isometric or conformal) SfT method constrains both x- and y-directions, causing the RS motion to be overconstrained.
To address the above issues, we propose a novel geomet-ric concept for RS cameras, termed scanline homography.
The set of scanline homographies of an RS image deﬁnes an image warp, with arbitrary ﬂexibility along the y-direction (the RS direction) which admits all possible camera mo-tions. The x-direction of the warp is constrained by the only admissible geometry, that the y-th scanline is imaged from a line in the template plane. The main contribution of this work is to establish the theory of scanline homographies with the following keypoints:
• We propose the scanline homography, a novel RS geo-metric concept given as a 3 × 2 matrix, which maps points on one RS scanline to a line in the template plane.
• We establish the fundamental homography equation between a scanline homography and its corresponding plane homography deﬁned from the template to the RS image.
• We estimate scanline homographies parameterised by
B-Splines along the RS direction to accommodate ﬂex-ible camera motions by solving a convex minimisation in closed-form.
• We propose a method to solve the ambiguous fun-damental homography equation to recover scanline poses, using an articulated plane homography parame-terisation and a GS homography initialisation inspired from motion smoothness.
• We design various experiments to demonstrate the va-lidity of the proposed theory, ranging from absolute pose estimation to image rectiﬁcation. 2.