Abstract
It is challenging to accurately detect camouflaged ob-jects from their highly similar surroundings. Existing meth-ods mainly leverage a single-stage detection fashion, while neglecting small objects with low-resolution fine edges re-quires more operations than the larger ones. To tackle camouflaged object detection (COD), we are inspired by humans attention coupled with the coarse-to-fine detection strategy, and thereby propose an iterative refinement frame-work, coined SegMaR, which integrates Segment, Magnify and Reiterate in a multi-stage detection fashion. Specifi-cally, we design a new discriminative mask which makes the model attend on the fixation and edge regions. In addition, we leverage an attention-based sampler to magnify the ob-ject region progressively with no need of enlarging the im-age size. Extensive experiments show our SegMaR achieves remarkable and consistent improvements over other state-of-the-art methods. Especially, we surpass two competitive methods 7.4% and 20.0% respectively in average over stan-dard evaluation metrics on small camouflaged objects. Ad-ditional studies provide more promising insights into Seg-MaR, including its effectiveness on the discriminative mask and its generalization to other network architectures. Code is available at https://github.com/dlut-dimt/SegMaR. 1.

Introduction
Camouflaged object detection (COD) is a task which aims to identify any object hidden in the background [8, 22, 29]. It has been commonly useful for many applications in different fields [9, 38], including agriculture (e.g. locust de-tection to prevent invasion), art (e.g. photo-realistic blend-ing and recreational art) and medical diagnosis (e.g. polyp segmentation). Biological and psychological studies have shown that various camouflage strategies can easily deceive the human’s visual perceptual system [38], since the cam-ouflaged objects always have similar visual features as the background surroundings. The major difficulty in COD is
*Corresponding author
Figure 1.
Illustration of our SegMaR (Segment, Magnify and
Reiterate) framework for camouflaged object detection. Multiple stages are performed iteratively in the framework. Each stage in-volves two main steps: segment the camouflaged object (the solid line) and magnify the camouflaged object (the dotted line). how to accurately distinguish the subtle differences between the target object and the background in the image.
Different from traditional methods [5, 29, 51], a number of recent works [4,7,8,20,28,45], by making use of sophis-ticated deep learning techniques [3, 43, 53], have achieved new state-of-the-art performance on all the COD bench-marks. Despite the quantitative performance by the latest methods looks promising (e.g. 0.80 of Sα on COD10K test set [8]), several difficulties in COD are still remaining un-solved. Particularly, when one certain camouflaged object accounts for a very small proportion of the whole image, it becomes more difficult to detect accurate edges around the object. For instance the crab in the first column in Fig. 1, its size is much smaller than the beach in the background.
Unfortunately, existing COD methods fail to detect small camouflaged objects accurately.
Their detection and segmentation results lead to high de-viation on low-resolution and small objects. One main rea-son is these methods employ a single-stage detection fash-ion, but many camouflaged objects are hardly detectable at the first time. In fact, when humans cannot watch any tar-get object in the scene clearly, they will consciously move closer to the target till its resolution is large enough for vi-sual recognition. We expect every person in front of the
screen is using such a manner to observe the small crab in
Fig. 1. Motivated by this human behavior, our work aims to address the research question: How to leverage more stages for gradually discovering more accurate camouflaged ob-jects?
To this end, we propose a new iterative refinement frame-work, coined SegMaR, which integrates Segment, Magnify and Reiterate via a multi-stage detection fashion, please see
Fig. 2. First of all, our approach builds a new camouflaged segmentation network to generate an initial mask predic-tion. Next, an object magnification step takes as input both the original image and the mask prediction, and leverages an attention-based sampler to enlarge the camouflaged ob-ject adaptively. It can be observed that the image size is kept while the camouflaged object accounts for a larger propor-tion in the image. Moreover, we run iterative refinement by passing the image with magnified object back into the same network and fine-tuning the network parameters. Af-ter more refinement stages, SegMaR enables to refine and enrich the detected details, especially for small objects.
Importantly, SegMaR is an unified and general frame-work which shall be applicable to various camouflaged seg-mentation networks. Considering the significance of object localization and edge extraction, we advocate several spe-cial designs on the segmentation network for improving the
COD performance further.
In particular, we introduce a distraction module to disen-tangle foreground and background features in order to cap-ture more accurate edges.
Besides, we present a new and non-binary ground truth called discriminative mask, which combines the fixation and edge annotations together. Beyond the original ground truth based on binary mask, our discriminative mask makes the network attend more on the most significant textures and edges associated with the camouflaged objects.
The contributions in this work are three-fold:
• Framework contribution: we propose SegMaR, which is the first to leverage an iterative refinement framework for camouflaged object detection. This work raises aware-ness of the importance of accomplishing COD in a multi-stage detection fashion.
• Network contribution: we implement an effective cam-ouflaged segmentation network which introduces a dis-traction module to disentangle better object feature.
In addition, we present a new discriminative mask to make the network attend on the most significant object regions.
• Empirical contribution: Our SegMaR achieves new state-of-the-art performance on three COD benchmarks, especially for small camouflaged objects. Besides, previ-ous COD networks are easy to be applicable to SegMaR and witness remarkable accuracy boosts. 2.