Abstract
Optical coherence tomography angiography (OCTA) is an important imaging modality in many bioengineering tasks. The image quality of OCTA, however, is often de-graded by Bulk Motion Artifacts (BMA), which are due to micromotion of subjects and typically appear as bright stripes surrounded by blurred areas. State-of-the-art meth-ods usually treat BMA removal as a learning-based image inpainting problem, but require numerous training samples with nontrivial annotation. In addition, these methods dis-card the rich structural and appearance information car-ried in the BMA stripe region. To address these issues, in this paper we propose a self-supervised content-aware BMA removal model. First, the gradient-based structural infor-mation and appearance feature are extracted from the BMA area and injected into the model to capture more connectiv-ity. Second, with easily collected defective masks, the model is trained in a self-supervised manner, in which only the clear areas are used for training while the BMA areas for inference. With the structural information and appearance feature from noisy image as references, our model can re-move larger BMA and produce better visualizing result. In addition, only 2D images with defective masks are involved, hence improving the efficiency of our method. Experiments on OCTA of mouse cortex demonstrate that our model can remove most BMA with extremely large sizes and inconsis-tent intensities while previous methods fail. 1.

Introduction
As a fast and non-invasive optical imaging technology with high spatiotemporal resolution, optical coherence to-mography (OCT) is an emerging medical imaging modal-ity not only for laboratory research but also for clinical applications [8]. Optical coherence tomography angiogra-phy (OCTA) has been reported to effectively diagnose and
*Corresponding author.
Figure 1. Illustration of OCTA affected by Bulk Motion Artifacts (BMA). Our work focuses on the BMA removal task in vessel mask (blue rectangle in dashed line). The enhanced OCTA after
BMA removal has better visualization quality. assess many retinal conditions, such as diabetic retinopa-thy [21], macular degeneration [23] and choroidal neovas-cular membrane [19]. Not only in ophthalmology, OCT has also been employed to visualize the prognosis of tu-mor vasculature for a better understanding of microenviron-ment [22]. Benefitting from high spatiotemporal resolution and non-invasive features, OCT has been utilized to study neurovascular changes and brain function in vivo.
A typical OCTA image of mouse cortex is shown in
Fig. 1. Previous approach [15] employed image enhance-ment to remove background noises for better qualitative and quantitative analysis. Specifically, a vessel mask was gen-erated to highlight vasculature while suppressing the back-ground noise. Unfortunately, this approach failed to remove
Bulk Motion Artifact (BMA), which was caused by micro-motion of the object, as highlighted with double arrows in
Fig. 1.
BMA is one of the most frequent artifacts affecting many
medical imaging modalities (CT, MRI and OCT), which se-riously degrades image quality and affects quantitative anal-ysis. Over decades of research, numerous models have been developed to remove BMA, but effective solutions for all circumstances remain missing. In OCTA, BMA causes a severely blurred image and usually appears as horizontal stripes of different widths with high-intensity in the cen-ter and low contrast in the surrounding area. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the horizontal stripes across OCTA are the areas affected by BMA. In the following sections, we use BMA and stripe (artifacts) interchangeably.
Previous approaches remove BMA with image registra-tion or supervised denoising models, requiring duplicate scans or numerous training data with annotations. The cur-rent state-of-the-art model [14] inpaints the BMA-affected areas to generate a clear vasculature mask for enhancement.
However, the inpainting model abandons the information in noisy areas so has limited capability to fill large gaps. Be-sides, lots of images with annotations are needed for train-ing. We observed that, even if the intensity value of BMA is far stronger than normal area, there were still textures within BMA. Furthermore, BMA only affects vertical gra-dient rather than horizontal ones due to the OCTA imaging process. These features could serve as structural references of vasculature in noisy BMA area. However, there are three main challenges for BMA removal: (1) information within the motion artifacts is too noisy; (2) how to inject structure information from the BMA area into the recovery frame-work; and (3) OCTA data are limited and the pixel-level annotations are difficult to acquire.
In this paper, we propose a self-supervised BMA re-moval method to solve the issues above. First, the gradient-based structural information and appearance feature are ex-tracted from BMA and injected into the model to capture more connectivity. Specifically, we keep the BMA-affected area, even the noisy one, as an input channel instead of dis-carding it directly. Furthermore, based on the observation that BMA mainly affects vertical gradients rather than hor-izontal ones, we introduce horizontal gradients to make our model aware of potential structures under BMA. Adding the gradient map makes the training stabler and convergence faster. With structural and appearance information and eas-ily collected defective masks, we train our model in a self-supervised manner that the clear areas are used for training while the BMA areas are only for inference.
With the rich structural and appearance information car-ried in the BMA stripe region as reference, our model can remove large BMA and handle the background noise at the same time. Our BMA removal model is end-to-end and only requires 2D image with defective mask, which is more prac-tical. Compared with other context-guided denoising mod-els, our content-aware model can learn guidance directly from noisy images and is thus more robust. Experiments on a mouse cortex OCTA dataset demonstrate that our model can remove most BMA under different intensities and ex-treme area sizes while existing methods fail. The specific contributions of our paper are:
• We propose a new structural denoising model that can leverage the rich structural and appearance information carried in the BMA stripe region.
• Our model is trained in a self-supervised manner, and training does not involve manual annotation.
• For image enhancement, our method can alleviate
BMA and background noises simultaneously, and thus significantly improve image quality. 2.