Abstract
The scarcity of labeled data and the problem of model overﬁtting have been the challenges in few-shot learning.
Recently, semi-supervised few-shot learning has been de-veloped to obtain pseudo-labels of unlabeled samples for expanding the support set. However, the relationship be-tween unlabeled and labeled data is not well exploited in generating pseudo labels, the noise of which will di-rectly harm the model learning.
In this paper, we pro-pose a Clustering-based semi-supervised Few-Shot Learn-ing (cluster-FSL) method to solve the above problems in image classiﬁcation. By using multi-factor collaborative representation, a novel Multi-Factor Clustering (MFC) is designed to fuse the information of few-shot data distribu-tion, which can generate soft and hard pseudo-labels for unlabeled samples based on labeled data. And we exploit the pseudo labels of unlabeled samples by MFC to expand the support set for obtaining more distribution informa-tion. Furthermore, robust data augmentation is used for support set in the ﬁne-tuning phase to increase the labeled samples’ diversity. We veriﬁed the validity of the cluster-FSL by comparing it with other few-shot learning meth-ods on three popular benchmark datasets, miniImageNet, tieredImageNet, and CUB-200-2011. The ablation exper-iments further demonstrate that our MFC can effectively fuse distribution information of labeled samples and pro-vide high-quality pseudo-labels. Our code is available at: https://gitlab.com/smartllvlab/cluster-fsl 1.

Introduction
Deep learning methods based on neural networks [34] have made great breakthroughs and been widely used in the
ﬁeld of computer vision [15] [32] [23]. Unfortunately, deep learning models require a massive amount of labeled data to learn huge-scale parameters. Moreover, the scenes in real life are complex and diverse. For instance, in some
*Equal contribution, † Corresponding author. practical problems, there exist objects that are rarely ob-served, such as the faces of the suspects, rare animal photos, and so on, which makes it difﬁcult to collect labeled data.
With the inspiration of the human vision system, much at-tention has been paid to the development of few-shot learn-ing [29] [38] [27] [7], which can release the strong demand for data used for training deep models to some extent.
The goal of few-shot learning is to learn a new concept or behavior from a very small number of samples based on experience. Due to the particularity of few-shot learn-ing, how to alleviate the overﬁtting problem that the model hardly ﬁts the distribution of the categories caused by the scarcity of samples, has always been the focus and difﬁculty of few-shot learning. With the development of few-shot learning, methods have been proposed to solve the above difﬁculty from three perspectives: model, data, and learn-ing algorithm. Model-based methods [28] [39] aim to learn the interactive information between samples by designing a model that adapts to the few-shot case. As for data, re-searchers have explored various methods to enrich training data, such as data augmentation [28] [1] [48], which prepro-cesses data through ﬂipping, cropping, translation, rotation, and zooming. However, data augmentation requires expen-sive labor costs and relies heavily on domain knowledge, resulting in some data augmentation methods being speciﬁc to datasets. Few-shot image classiﬁcation based on learn-ing methods [45] [14] [38] aim to improve the generaliza-tion of the model by using meta-learning or transfer learn-ing strategy, which learns meta-knowledge or transferrable knowledge shared in different subtasks. However, the per-formance of few-shot learning is still far from satisfactory because the small set of labeled data cannot provide rich and essential information for recent model learning.
When the task has few-shot labeled samples and addi-tional unlabeled data for new categories, a straightforward approach is to utilize the unlabeled samples to alleviate the scarcity of labeled samples. Unlabeled data has been effectively explored by semi-supervised learning methods, including a combination of weak data augmentation and strong augmentation [37], consistent regularization [16],
adversarial perturbation regularization [40], achieving very exciting performance without using a large number of anno-tated samples. If unlabeled data can be explored by comb-ing semi-supervised learning with few-shot learning (e.g., mining pseudo-labels of unlabeled samples), problems such as data scarcity can be solved to some extent. Recent few-shot image classiﬁcation combined with semi-supervised learning [31] [22] [38] focuses on improving the accuracy of pseudo-label prediction for unlabeled samples and is ex-pected to obtain more correct pseudo-labels to expand the training set. However, existing methods cannot obtain com-pletely correct pseudo-labels. How to avoid the inﬂuence of false pseudo-labels on model training and how to use sample distribution information to assist the acquisition of pseudo-labels are still current challenges.
To solve the aforementioned issues, we propose a Clustering-based semi-supervised Few-Shot Learning (cluster-FSL) method in image classiﬁcation. By introduc-ing labeled samples as factors of a cluster and represent-ing unlabeled data on a multi-factor dictionary, we pro-pose Multi-Factor Clustering (MFC) to guide the acquisi-tion of pseudo-labels of unlabeled samples, which combines the distribution information of labeled and unlabeled sam-ples for assisting clustering and obtaining more accurate pseudo-labels.
In the ﬁne-tuning stage, we design robust data augmentation to augment the support set and adopt the
MFC module to predict soft labels of query samples, learn-ing more discriminative feature distribution. In the testing stage, we use MFC instead of label propagation to assign more accurate pseudo-labels to unlabeled samples for ex-panding the test support set. The experimental results have shown that our cluster-FSL has achieved state-of-the-art performance (e.g., 2.45% improvement in the 5-way 1-shot scene of miniImageNet when the backbone is ResNet-12) on miniImageNet, tiered-ImageNet, and CUB-200-2011.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows. 1. A novel multiple factor clustering (MFC) algorithm, which includes factors of labeled and unlabeled samples and exploits the distribution information among these fac-tors via a multi-factor dictionary, is proposed, generating more accurate clustering results. 2. The proposed MFC is integrated into the ﬁne-tuning stage and testing stage in a new way, with outputting high-quality pseudo labels for expanding the query and test sup-port set effectively. 2.