Abstract  the  demand 
With the rapid development of artificial intelligence and  autonomous  driving  for  technology,  semiconductors is projected to rise substantially. However,  the  massive  expansion  of  semiconductor  manufacturing  and  the  development  of  new  technology  will  bring  many  defect wafers. If these defect wafers have not been correctly  inspected,  the  ineffective  semiconductor  processing  on  these  defect  wafers  will  cause  additional  impact  to  our  environment,  such  as  excessive  carbon  dioxide  emission  and energy consumption. 
In  this  paper,  we  utilize  the  information  processing  advantages  of  quantum  computing  to  promote  the  defect  learning  defect  review  (DLDR).  We  propose  a  classical-quantum hybrid algorithm for deep learning on near-term  quantum  processors.  By  tuning  parameters  implemented  on  it,  quantum  circuit  driven  by  our  framework  learns  a  include  of  wafer  defect  map  given  DLDR  classification,  defect  pattern  classification,  and  hotspot  detection. In addition, we explore parametrized quantum  circuits  with  different  expressibility  and  entangling  capacities.  These  results  can  be  used  to  build  a  future  roadmap to develop circuit-based quantum deep learning  for semiconductor defect detection.  task,  1.

Introduction 
The  industry  presents  a  paradox.  The  achievement  of  global climate goals will depend on semiconductors. They  are  an  integral  part  of  solar  arrays,  wind  turbines,  and  electric  vehicles.  But  chip  manufacturing  requires  huge  amounts of energy and water, and it emit a lot of exhaust  gas during the production process. In addition to switching  to  implement  efficiencies  in  fabs  to  reduce  their  carbon  footprint,  including ineffective processing on the defect wafer.  renewables,  chipmakers  could  also 
In  the  semiconductor  manufacturing,  there  are  three  main types of defects: wafer defect map, defect pattern, and  hotspot.  Wafer  defect  map  is  used  to  visualize  the  distribution  of  defect  patterns  and  identify  potential  process  and  tool  issues.  Continuous-monitoring  wafer  defect  maps  are  crucial  for  yield  management  because  a  sudden  increase  in  the  problematic  patterns  can  be  feedback to operation engineers to resolve the related issue. 
Generally,  it  is  known  that  conventional  defect  patterns  such  as  cluster,  scratch,  and  ring  are  closely  related  to  a  certain type of process. For example, as shown in Figure 1,  the  defect  map  “Edge”  is  caused  by  the  damaged  low  thermal mass (LTM) pad. LTM is an industrial grade self-regulating heating cable used for pipelines and chambers. 
Under the high temperature and high pressure of chemical  vapor deposition (CVD) process, LTM pad will gradually  get aged and cracked. Then, it will produce particles that  fall on the edge of wafer surface. Another example “Cluster”  is  a  mass  of  particles  on  the  wafer  surface  during  the 
Etching process. This defect is usually caused by the aged  component  of  side  O-ring.  When  this  defect  maps  are  detected, it means that the chamber needs to maintenance  and replace aging parts with new ones. 
Figure 1: Defect map and its root cause. 
The  defect  pattern  is  the  unit  that  composes  the  wafer  map,  which  image  is  obtained  by  a  higher  resolution  inspection tool. Each defect pattern signals the root cause,  and engineers can diagnose the failure and prevent it from  happening again. As shown in Figure 2, the defect pattern 
"Multi-dots" mainly occurs in the WET Etching chamber  pipeline  and  is  caused  by  the  dirty  nozzles  of  xFlow. 
Another example is “Fallon” that often occurs on the CVD  chamber. The main reason is the fall on particle caused by  the damage of the point-of-use (POU) filter. The damage  component  must  be  replaced  immediately  to  avoid  this  defect from happening again.                           
linear  part  by  the  quantum  circuit  to  take  advantage  of  possible speedup in quantum computation.  We propose the  hybrid  classical-quantum  deep  learning  (HCQDL)  based  on  quantum  circuit  for  the  above  various  types  of  defect  inspection. Our HCQDL consists of classical and quantum  layers.  The  classical  the  layers  combination of self-proliferation and self-attention block. 
Self-proliferation  block  used  a  linear  transformations to generate more feature maps at a cheaper  computing cost. Then, self-attention block learned a wealth  of  information  about  long-range  dependencies  from  this  generated feature.  implemented  by  series  of 
The  quantum  layer  implemented  by  various  quantum  circuit built in the continuous-variable architecture, which  encodes  quantum  information  in  continuous  degrees  of  freedom such as the amplitudes of the electromagnetic field. 
By tuning parameters implemented on it, quantum circuit  driven  by  our  framework  learns  a  given  DLDR  task,  include of  wafer defect  map  classification, defect pattern  classification,  and  hotspot  detection.  The  main  contributions of the paper are:  (1)  We  introduce  a  new  network  architecture,  Self-Proliferation-and-Attention  block  (SP&A  Block),  which  can perform feature engineering in a more efficient way.   (2) We present the parametrized quantum circuit (PQC)  with different expressibility and entangling capacities, and  compare  their  training  performance  to  quantify  the  expected benefits.  (3)  We  provide  a  future  roadmap  to  develop  circuit-for  based  hybrid  quantum-classical  deep  semiconductor defect detection.  learning 
The  rest  of  the  paper  has  been  organized  as  follows: 
Section  2  describes  the  related  works  of  deep  learning  defect  review  (DLDR)  and  quantum  machine  learning. 
Section  3  presents  our  proposed  HCQDL  model  and  explore  it  in  detail  theoretically.  Section  4  compares  the  results of latest DLDR  models and our proposed method  according to different metrics through several experiments. 
Finally,  we  conclude  with  some  final  thoughts  and  give  future work recommendations in section 5.  2.