Abstract
Adversary and invisibility are two fundamental but con-flict characters of adversarial perturbations. Previous ad-versarial attacks on 3D point cloud recognition have of-ten been criticized for their noticeable point outliers, since they just involve an “implicit constrain” like global dis-tance loss in the time-consuming optimization to limit the generated noise. While point cloud is a highly structured data format, it is hard to constrain its perturbation with a simple loss or metric properly.
In this paper, we pro-pose a novel Point-Cloud Sensitivity Map to boost both the efficiency and imperceptibility of point perturbations.
This map reveals the vulnerability of point cloud recogni-tion models when encountering shape-invariant adversarial noises. These noises are designed along the shape surface with an “explicit constrain” instead of extra distance loss.
Specifically, we first apply a reversible coordinate transfor-mation on each point of the point cloud input, to reduce one degree of point freedom and limit its movement on the tan-gent plane. Then we calculate the best attacking direction with the gradients of the transformed point cloud obtained on the white-box model. Finally we assign each point with a non-negative score to construct the sensitivity map, which benefits both white-box adversarial invisibility and black-box query-efficiency extended in our work. Extensive evalu-ations prove that our method can achieve the superior per-formance on various point cloud recognition models, with its satisfying adversarial imperceptibility and strong resis-tance to different point cloud defense settings. Our code is available at: https://github.com/shikiw/SI-Adv. 1.

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have contributed a lot to various computer vision tasks with their highly praised performances. However, recent works prove that DNNs are
*Corresponding author. (a) Clean PC (b) Previous Adv (c) Our Adv
Figure 1. The point-cloud shape surface of clean (left), previous adversarial perturbations (middle) and our perturbation (right). vulnerable to adversarial examples [11, 25], which are gen-erated by adding imperceptible perturbations on clean in-puts to mislead the prediction of deep learning models. Nu-merous algorithms have been proposed to implement dif-ferent kinds of adversarial attacks [4, 8, 11, 13, 25]. In addi-tion to 2D images, the research scope of adversarial attacks has been gradually extended to 3D point clouds. As one of the most popular data representations captured by 3D sen-sors like LiDAR, point clouds are widely used in a variety of 3D computer vision applications, such as autopilot [42] and autonomous driving [20]. Similar with image recog-nition models, recent works [3, 22, 24, 28, 30, 38, 40] show that point-cloud models are also susceptible to adversarial perturbations. But unfortunately, existing 3D adversarial at-tacks either generate the noticeable point perturbation or fo-cus on the white-box case, leading to the poor performance on well-defended models or unseen black-box models.
The motivation for delving into black-box attacks on point cloud recognition is quite clear. On the one hand, both industry and academia have attached increasing impor-tance on evaluating the robustness of point cloud models, especially for some security-critical applications like au-tonomous driving. But usually, they can not release the de-tails of the model or algorithms to robustness testers due to the protection agreement of trade secrets. Therefore, testers can only conduct black-box attacks to reach the demand of robustness evaluation, which requires the more efficient
seen black-box model with a white-box surrogate model to improve the black-box attack ability.
Motivated by the above two observations, our paper further proposes the first query-based black-box attack al-gorithm on point cloud recognition. Through inheriting the ranked sensitivity map prior from white-box surrogate model Hw to black-box target model Hb, we limit the point movement on the shape surface as shown in Figure 1. To boost the query efficiency, we combine each point with its certified best direction as a point-wise basis. Only one basis is perturbed during each query step according to the sensi-tivity ranking, in the light of SimBA [14] and LeBA [36].
Experiments on ModelNet40 [31] and ShapeNetPart [37] show that our method achieve the superior performance on various 3D recognition models, which highlights the mean-ing of the proposed point-cloud sensitivity map.
To summarize, our contributions are three-fold as below.
• We propose the point-cloud sensitivity map, for evalu-ating the variance of recognition confidence when each point encounters the shape-invariant perturbation.
• Guided by the sensitivity map, we propose the strong shape-invariant white-box attack and the first query-based black-box attack on point cloud recognition.
• Experiments show the efficiency of our attack on vari-ous recognition models with the high imperceptibility and the low query cost under black-box settings. 2.