Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new cue of depth sensing using thermal radiation. Our method realizes passive, tex-ture independent, far range, and dark scene applicability, which can broaden the depth sensing subjects. A key ob-servation is that thermal radiation is attenuated by the air and is wavelength dependent. By modeling the wavelength-dependent attenuation by the air and building a multi-spectral LWIR measurement system, we can jointly estimate the depth, temperature, and emissivity of the target. We analytically show the capability of the thermal radiation cue and show the effectiveness of the method in real-world scenes using an imaging system with a few bandpass filters. 1.

Introduction
Depth sensing is an important technology, as shown by its wide range of applications. Depth sensing tech-niques refer to physics-based cues used to recover the scene depth, known as “shape from X.” Historically, a great num-ber of cues such as triangulation/disparity [23], time-of-flight [21], polarization [46], shading [25], silhouettes [9], focus/defocus [44], and texture [60] have been proposed.
These “X” cues play an important role in depth sensing in various scenarios. However, existing depth sensing tech-niques require either clear visibility of the texture or an ac-tive light source to illuminate the surface, and there is no approach to passively measure depth in dark environments.
In this paper, we propose an unprecedented depth sens-ing modality that can be used in dark and passive scenarios.
As a key to achieving this property, we use the attenuation of long wavelength infrared (LWIR) radiation through the air. As all objects emit thermal radiation according to their temperature, we can see the objects without any active light sources. Besides, since the attenuation of LWIR is much
*Equal contribution.
Figure 1. Overview of the shape from thermal radiation. Our method jointly estimates the depth, temperature, and emissivity images from multi-spectral LWIR images. A key observation is that thermal radiation from the target object is attenuated through the air and is wavelength dependent. larger than that of visible light and the amount of attenu-ation decays exponentially with respect to the depth, it is possible to recover the depth.
Because the observed intensity depends on both the ob-ject’s temperature and the attenuation, we have to separate these factors. Fortunately, attenuation through the air is wavelength dependent. Thus, we use multi-spectral obser-vation in the LWIR range to jointly estimate the depth and temperature of the target object as shown in Fig. 1.
This paper focuses on the possibility of depth sensing by only using passive thermal radiation. The contributions of this study are twofold.
• We propose a novel cue for “shape from X” tech-niques. The shape from thermal radiation uses the at-tenuation of thermal radiation by the air. This is new to computer vision and computational imaging areas and broadens the field of research.
• To the best of our knowledge, the proposed method is the first attempt to realize passive, texture-less, far range, and can be used for dark scenes. This property proves that air absorption cues in LWIR are useful for depth sensing.
2.