Abstract
In this paper, we are concerned with enhancing the gen-eralization capability of object detectors. And we consider a realistic yet challenging scenario, namely Single-Domain
Generalized Object Detection (Single-DGOD), which aims to learn an object detector that performs well on many unseen target domains with only one source domain for training. Towards Single-DGOD, it is important to extract domain-invariant representations (DIR) containing intrin-sical object characteristics, which is beneﬁcial for improv-ing the robustness for unseen domains. Thus, we present a method, i.e., cyclic-disentangled self-distillation, to dis-entangle DIR from domain-speciﬁc representations without the supervision of domain-related annotations (e.g., domain labels). Concretely, a cyclic-disentangled module is ﬁrst proposed to cyclically extract DIR from the input visual fea-tures. Through the cyclic operation, the disentangled ability can be promoted without the reliance on domain-related an-notations. Then, taking the DIR as the teacher, we design a self-distillation module to further enhance the generaliza-tion ability. In the experiments, our method is evaluated in urban-scene object detection. Experimental results of ﬁve weather conditions show that our method obtains a signiﬁ-cant performance gain over baseline methods. Particularly, for the night-sunny scene, our method outperforms base-lines by 3%, which indicates that our method is instrumen-tal in enhancing generalization ability. Data and code are available at https://github.com/AmingWu/Single-DGOD. 1.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the rapid development of deep learning based object detection [2, 6, 37, 43, 45], which assumes that the training and test data are from the same do-main. However, in real applications, when object detectors trained on source domain data are applied to unseen target domains, these detectors usually suffer from poor general-∗Corresponding author.
Figure 1. Illustration of Single-Domain Generalized Object Detec-tion (Single-DGOD) with the urban-scene detection dataset. The dataset contains ﬁve domains with different weather conditions: daytime-sunny, night-sunny, dusk-rainy, night-rainy, and daytime-foggy. Single-DGOD aims to train a detector on one source do-main dataset (e.g., the daytime-sunny scene) and generalize well to multiple target domains. Extracting domain-invariant represen-tations is beneﬁcial for generalizing a detector to unseen domains. ization, due to the domain-shift impact [8, 34].
To alleviate the domain-shift impact, existing researches mainly focus on domain adaptation and domain generaliza-tion. In general, domain adaptation [4, 11, 36, 46] aims to align the data distribution from one annotated source do-main to that from one target domain without annotations.
During training, the aligned methods often need to access both source and target domain data, which results in these methods can not well adapt to other unseen target domains.
Besides, when the target domain is a compound of multiple different data distributions [27], the generalization ability of the aligned methods tends to be weak, which attenuates the performance of object detection.
Domain generalization (DG) [24, 25, 39, 40, 52] aims to generalize a model to an unseen target domain by learning from multiple source domains, which is considered to be more challenging than domain adaptation. Generally, most
DG methods [1, 12, 23, 25] try to learn a shared represen-tation across multiple source domains. However, the per-formance of these methods highly depends on the number of source domains [9, 53]. And in the real world, collect-ing multiple source datasets is time-consuming and labor-intensive, which limits the application of DG methods.
we explore employing self-distillation [21, 50] to distill the knowledge of the current detector. Concretely, the disentan-gled DIR is taken as teacher representations. By narrowing the distance between the DIR and the feature maps gener-ated by middle layers of the backbone network, the feature maps could be promoted to contain more domain-invariant information, which is beneﬁcial for improving generaliza-tion ability and detection performance. In the experiments, our method is evaluated on urban-scene object detection.
Extensive experiments on ﬁve scenes with different weather conditions demonstrate the superiorities of our method.
The contributions are summarized as follows: (1) To improve the generalization ability of object detec-tors, we propose a realistic yet challenging task, i.e., Single-Domain Generalized Object Detection (Single-DGOD), which aims to generalize a detector to multiple unseen tar-get domains with only one source domain for training. (2) To tackle Single-DGOD, we employ a method of cyclic-disentangled self-distillation to disentangle domain-invariant representations without the reliance on domain-related annotations (e.g., domain labels). (3) We build a Diverse-Weather Dataset of urban-scene object detection to verify our method, which consists of
ﬁve scenes with different weather conditions, i.e., daytime-sunny, night-sunny, dusk-rainy, night-rainy, and daytime-foggy. The signiﬁcant performance gain over baseline methods shows the effectiveness of the proposed method. 2.