Abstract
A variety of diagnostic and therapeutic protocols rely on locating in vivo target anatomical structures, which can be obtained from medical scans. However, organs move and deform as the patient changes his/her pose. In order to ob-tain accurate target location information, clinicians have to either conduct frequent intraoperative scans, resulting in higher exposition of patients to radiations, or adopt proxy procedures (e.g., creating and using custom molds to keep patients in the exact same pose during both preoperative organ scanning and subsequent treatment. Such custom proxy methods are typically sub-optimal, constraining the clinicians and costing precious time and money to the pa-tients. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first to present a learning-based approach to estimate the patient’s internal organ deformation for arbitrary human poses in order to assist with radiotherapy and similar medical pro-tocols. The underlying method first leverages medical scans to learn a patient-specific representation that potentially encodes the organ’s shape and elastic properties. During inference, given the patient’s current body pose informa-tion and the organ’s representation extracted from previous medical scans, our method can estimate their current organ deformation to offer guidance to clinicians. We conduct experiments on a well-sized dataset which is augmented through real clinical data using finite element modeling.
Our results suggest that pose-dependent organ deformation can be learned through a point cloud autoencoder condi-tioned on the parametric pose input. We hope that this work can be a starting point for future research towards closing the loop between human mesh recovery and anatomical re-construction, with applications beyond the medical domain. 1.

Introduction
Many medical procedures rely on precise location and shape information of target tissues. Since radioactive scans are invasive, there is a maximum number that a patient can safely undergo per specific time period [10, 12]. Due to this
Figure 1. Application overview. The information from previous medical scans can facilitate estimating current organ’s shape and deformation. constraint, doctors have to carefully plan imaging protocols, weighing risks for the patient versus spatial and temporal inconsistency that may arise from too coarse scan-based investigation. Any solution to help determine the evolu-tion of an illness or the impact of a treatment without ex-cessive imaging would greatly help clinicians and reduce patients’ risks. Currently, complex protocols are used to precisely target organ regions while minimizing potential radioactive damage. For example, in radiotherapy (a can-cer treatment that uses high doses of radiation to kill can-cerous cells and shrink tumors [8]), it is common practice to create and use patient-specific molds (usually made of plastic or plaster) to keep patients in the exact same pose during both preoperative organ scanning and during subse-quent treatment sessions. Such customized molds help en-sure the desired organ region is targeted accurately without having to re-scan the patient and re-localize the tumors be-fore each session. This custom proxy method—like other
methods specific to different scan-reliant treatments—are typically sub-optimal, constraining the clinicians and cost-ing precious time and money to the patients. These proto-cols could however be relaxed with appropriate organ pose estimation, thereby removing the need for patient-specific molds and decreasing cost and delays of such vital proce-dures (i.e., more generic and thus less costly molds could be adopted with the sole purpose of keeping patients still dur-ing treatment). Other less sensitive domains could also ben-efit from cheaper and computationally-lighter organ pose estimation. Existing simulation tools mostly rely on finite-element modeling (FEM) [11, 16, 23] to predict the defor-mation of soft tissues—such as organs—based on input load forces. Their inherent computational footprint and abstrac-tion makes them unpractical for real-time and artistic appli-cations (e.g., movie or video-game industries). In this paper, we not only propose a modeling function that relies on light-weight operations during inference, but we also condition it on more concrete parameters, i.e., the pose of the target per-son; therefore making this kind of simulation accessible to a larger audience.
In order to learn the latent correspondences between hu-man contours and in vivo organ deformations, we need a representation of the human body model. While the popu-lar skinned multi-person linear (SMPL) model [22] and its variants [27, 33] provide a flexible statistical representation to capture human pose and shape deformations, they do not have the necessary information to model in vivo organ de-formations. In our work, we propose a novel approach to address this issue. While retaining the computational flex-ibility offered by the family of SMPL models, we take one new step: modeling how the pose parameters affect inter-nal organ deformations. Our intuition is that when a pa-tient changes pose (e.g., arms stretched over head as in Fig-ure 2), internal organs deform accordingly, and we seek to capture all these changes (pose and internal deforma-tions) jointly. Concretely, while the SMPL family defines two parameters, θ for pose and β for shape, our method adds one additional parameter for organ deformation: α.
Consequently, whereas the SMPL model learns the func-tion mapping (β, θ) to the vertices of the human mesh, our method seeks to additionally capture organ deformations from (β, θ, α). In particular, we propose a framework that can (1) extract patient-specific organ representation from previous medical scans and (2) estimate the organ defor-mation conditioned on arbitrary human poses for any scans in the future. To the best of our knowledge, there has been little previous work studying similar topics, despite the need transpiring from the medical community.
To summarize, our contributions are three-fold: 1. We unify the shape representation for one specific or-gan across different patients by automatically setting up anatomical correspondences. Specifically, we ap-Figure 2. Four data samples in our dataset. For each subject, the segmentation of lung (yellow), livers (green), spleen (grey) and kidneys (blue) are available, alongside with full-body skin seg-mentation (red). ply a 3D deformable registration between a mean or-gan binary segmentation and any given segmentation in the dataset. The generated deformation field can warp the mean organ’s 3D mesh into any shape in the dataset such that every organ’s representation can be unified into a fixed-length point cloud representation with anatomical correspondences, as in Figure 3. 2. We propose SMPL-A (“A” for anatomy), an extenstion to the SMPL model for pose/shape-dependent organ deformation estimation. SMPL-A encodes the organ’s shape into a low-dimensional representation α and can reconstruct a deformed organ shape conditioned on different poses during inference. In a novel fashion, the proposed framework correlates a patient’s external pose change to internal organ deformation, which may significantly contribute to surgical guidance; 3. Our work suggests that the organ’s shape and elas-tic properties can indeed be encoded into lower-dimensional representations α. The experimental re-sults also demonstrate that conditioned on the patient’s exterior body movement, a deformed organ mesh can be reconstructed with the patient-specific organ repre-sentation that was extracted from previous scans. 2.