Abstract
Existing state-of-the-art 3D instance segmentation meth-ods perform semantic segmentation followed by grouping.
The hard predictions are made when performing semantic segmentation such that each point is associated with a sin-gle class. However, the errors stemming from hard deci-sion propagate into grouping that results in (1) low over-laps between the predicted instance with the ground truth and (2) substantial false positives. To address the afore-mentioned problems, this paper proposes a 3D instance segmentation method referred to as SoftGroup by perform-ing bottom-up soft grouping followed by top-down reﬁne-ment. SoftGroup allows each point to be associated with multiple classes to mitigate the problems stemming from se-mantic prediction errors and suppresses false positive in-stances by learning to categorize them as background. Ex-perimental results on different datasets and multiple eval-Its uation metrics demonstrate the efﬁcacy of SoftGroup. performance surpasses the strongest prior method by a sig-niﬁcant margin of +6.2% on the ScanNet v2 hidden test set and +6.8% on S3DIS Area 5 in terms of AP50. Soft-Group is also fast, running at 345ms per scan with a sin-gle Titan X on ScanNet v2 dataset. The source code and trained models for both datasets are available at https:
//github.com/thangvubk/SoftGroup.git. 1.

Introduction
Scene understanding on 3D data has received increasing attention for the rapid development of 3D sensors and avail-ability of large-scale 3D datasets. Instance segmentation on point clouds is a 3D perception task, serving as the foun-dation for a wide range of applications such as autonomous driving, virtual reality, and robot navigation. Instance seg-mentation processes the point clouds to output a category and an instance mask for each detected object.
State-of-the-art methods [4, 15, 20] consider 3D instance segmentation as a bottom-up pipeline. They learn the point-wise semantic labels and center offset vectors and then group points of the same labels with small geomet-Figure 1. Instance segmentation with and without SoftGroup from the same semantic prediction results. The last row shows the palette for semantic predictions only. Instance predictions are il-lustrated by different random colors for different objects. In the se-mantic prediction results, some regions of cabinet are wrongly predicted as other furniture. Without SoftGroup, these er-rors are propagated to instance prediction. SoftGroup addresses this problem and produces more accurate instance masks. ric distances into instances. These grouping algorithms are performed on the hard semantic prediction, where a point is associated with a single class. In many cases, ob-jects are locally ambiguous, the output semantic predictions show different categories for different parts, and thus us-ing hard semantic predictions for instance grouping leads to two problems: (1) low overlap between predicted instance and the ground-truth and (2) extra false-positive instances from wrong semantic regions. Figure 1 shows a visual-ization example. Here, in the semantic prediction results, some parts of cabinet is wrongly predicted as other furniture. When hard semantic predictions are used to perform grouping, the semantic prediction error is prop-agated to instance prediction. As a result, the predicted cabinet instance has low overlap with the ground truth, and the other furniture instance is a false positive.
This paper proposes SoftGroup to address these prob-lems by considering soft semantic scores to perform group-ing instead of hard one-hot semantic predictions. The intu-ition of SoftGroup is illustrated in Figure 2. Our ﬁnding is that the object parts with wrong semantic predictions still have reasonable scores for the true semantic class. Soft-Group relies on a score threshold to determine which cate-gory the object belongs instead of the argument max values.
Grouping on the soft semantic scores produces for accurate instance on true semantic class. The instance with wrong semantic prediction will be suppressed by learning to cate-gorize it as background. To this end, we treat an instance proposal as either a positive or negative sample depending on the maximum Intersection over Union (IoU) with the ground truth, then construct a top-down reﬁnement stage to reﬁne the positive sample and suppress the negative one.
As shown in Figure 1, SoftGroup is able to produce accurate instance masks from imperfect semantic prediction.
SoftGroup is conceptually simple and easy to imple-ment. Experiments on the ScanNet v2 [6] and S3DIS [1] benchmark datasets show the efﬁcacy of our method. No-tably, SoftGroup outperforms the previous state-of-the-art method by a signiﬁcant margin of +6.2% on the ScanNet hidden test set and +6.8% on S3DIS Area 5 in terms of
AP50. SoftGroup is fast, requiring 345ms to process a Scan-Net scene. In summary, our contribution is threefold.
• We propose SoftGroup that performs grouping on soft semantic scores to avoid error propagation from hard semantic predictions to instance segmentation.
• We propose a top-down reﬁnement stage to correct, re-ﬁne the positive samples and suppress false positives introduced by wrong semantic predictions.
• We report extensive experiments on multiple datasets with different evaluation metrics, showing signiﬁcant improvements over existing state-of-the-art methods. 2.