Abstract
In this paper, we propose a conceptually novel, effi-cient, and fully convolutional framework for real-time in-stance segmentation. Previously, most instance segmen-tation methods heavily rely on object detection and per-form mask prediction based on bounding boxes or dense centers. In contrast, we propose a sparse set of instance activation maps, as a new object representation, to high-light informative regions for each foreground object. Then instance-level features are obtained by aggregating fea-tures according to the highlighted regions for recognition and segmentation. Moreover, based on bipartite match-ing, the instance activation maps can predict objects in a one-to-one style, thus avoiding non-maximum suppression (NMS) in post-processing. Owing to the simple yet effec-tive designs with instance activation maps, SparseInst has extremely fast inference speed and achieves 40 FPS and 37.9 AP on the COCO benchmark, which significantly out-performs the counterparts in terms of speed and accuracy.
Code and models are available at https://github. com/hustvl/SparseInst. 1.

Introduction
Instance segmentation aims to generate instance-level segmentation for each object in an image. Based on the ad-vances in deep convolutional neural networks and object de-tection, recent works [4,9,14,18,40] have made tremendous progress in instance segmentation and achieved impressive results on large-scale benchmarks, e.g., COCO [24]. How-ever, developing real-time and efficient instance segmenta-tion algorithms is still challenging and urgent, especially for autonomous driving and robotics.
Prevalent methods tend to adopt detectors [30, 37] to lo-calize instances first and then segment through region-based
†Xinggang Wang is the corresponding author.
Figure 1. Speed-and-accuracy Trade-off. The proposed Sparse-Inst outperforms most state-of-the-art methods in both speed and accuracy for real-time instance segmentation. Inference speeds are measured on one NVIDIA 2080Ti. convolutional networks [14], dynamic convolutions [36], etc. Those methods are conceptually intuitive and achieve great performance. However, when it comes to real-time in-stance segmentation, those methods suffer from some limi-tations. Firstly, most methods employ dense anchors (cen-ters) to localize and then segment objects, e.g., more than 5456 instances (given 512 × 512 input) in CondInst [36], which incur lots of redundant predictions and much compu-tation burden. Besides, the receptive field of each pixel is limited and the contextual information is insufficient if we densely localize objects by centers or anchors [6, 12]. Sec-ondly, most methods require multi-level prediction to han-dle the scale variation of natural objects, which inevitably increases the latency. Region-based methods [14] apply
RoI-Align to acquire region features, making it difficult to deploy algorithms to edge/embedded devices. Finally, the post-processing also requires attention since the sorting and
NMS as well as processing masks are time-consuming, es-Figure 3. SparseInst is a pure and fully convolutional frame-work and independent from detectors. Benefiting from the facts: (1) the sparse predictions through the instance acti-vation maps; (2) single-level prediction; (3) compact struc-tures; (4) simple post-processing without NMS or sorting,
SparseInst has extremely fast inference speed and achieves 37.9 mask AP on MS-COCO test-dev with 40.0 FPS on one NVIDIA 2080Ti GPU, outperforming most state-of-the-art methods for real-time instance segmentation. Given 448× input, SparseInst achieves 58.5 FPS with competitive accuracy, which is faster than previous methods. We hope the proposed SparseInst can serve as a general framework for (real-time) end-to-end instance segmentation. 2.