Abstract
Physical contact provides additional constraints for hand-object state reconstruction as well as a basis for fur-ther understanding of interaction affordances. Estimat-ing these severely occluded regions from monocular images presents a considerable challenge. Existing methods op-timize the hand-object contact driven by distance thresh-old or prior from contact-labeled datasets. However, due to the number of subjects and objects involved in these in-door datasets being limited, the learned contact patterns could not be generalized easily. Our key idea is to recon-struct the contact pattern directly from monocular images, and then utilize the physical stability criterion in the simula-tion to optimize it. This criterion is deﬁned by the resultant forces and contact distribution computed by the physics en-gine. Compared to existing solutions, our framework can be adapted to more personalized hands and diverse ob-ject shapes. Furthermore, an interaction dataset with ex-tra physical attributes is created to verify the sim-to-real consistency of our methods. Through comprehensive evalu-ations, hand-object contact can be reconstructed with both accuracy and stability by the proposed framework. 1.

Introduction
Monocular hand-object contact recovery has wide appli-cations, which can enable accurate interactions in metaverse and telepresence robot control. Traditional methods often judge contact regions by the closest distances between sur-faces of the hand and object in an optimization strategy [58], where the recovered contact highly depends on the accuracy of hand-object pose estimation. However, this accuracy is hard to be guaranteed by monocular reconstruction. Recent approaches [5, 17, 62] learn the hand-object contact prior from well-labeled datasets [3, 52], yet their performance
∗Corresponding author. E-mail: yangangwang@seu.edu.cn. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62076061), the “Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship Program by
CAST” (No. YES20200025), and the “Zhishan Young Scholar” Program of Southeast University (No. 2242021R41083).
Figure 1. Stability-driven contact reconstruction. Each row il-lustrates the hand-object state represented by multiple ellipsoids.
The resultant forces and torques on the objects are calculated by the physics engine [8]. rely on the diversity of the contact data.
Generally speaking, a credible contact is to ensure the in-teracting stability between a hand and object in the physical world, either to keep the object stationary or with a required acceleration. To reconstruct this stable contact, our key idea is to reconstruct the contact pattern driven by the physi-cal criteria (i.e., the balancing of forces and torques) cal-culated by a physics engine. It is noted that most existing methods [7, 21, 27, 29] utilize the relative object displace-ments to evaluate the contact stability. However, the crite-ria cannot be directly used to drive optimization due to the shortcomings in both hand modeling and stability evalua-tion.
Regarding hand modeling, traditional methods for sim-ulation utilize either a whole mesh [21] or multiple mesh segments without connectivity [34, 55, 58]. Such models are difﬁcult to perform robot control and force analysis due to the lack of a kinematic tree. To overwhelm the limita-tions, we adopt a structured multi-body for dynamics sim-ulation, whose rigid parts can be automatically adjusted according to the personalized information estimated from an image. Speciﬁcally, those hand rigid parts and the ob-ject are jointly represented as a series of ellipsoidal prim-itives, and our front-end network is used to estimate the state parameters for composing these primitives. Compared with MANO [47] parameters, regressing this state not only brings acceleration to the calculation of self and mutual col-lision during network training but also facilitates the con-struction of our multi-body in a physics engine.
We argue that the stability could not be fully evaluated by the displacement of the contact object, which is an aver-age effect of the resultant force. Alternatively, some novel stability criteria are proposed with more considerations on physical factors related to contact. Considering the con-tact constraints are unilateral, we use sampling-based op-timization rather than gradient-based methods to make the estimated state meet the above stability requirements. A hand-object contact dataset is further built to analyze the sim-to-real gap in our simulation.
In addition to images and meshes of hands and objects, our proposed dataset in-cludes physical properties and stability evaluations for each interaction scene. The stability of a real interaction scene is mainly evaluated by the additional balancing force that needs to be applied to the object when capturing contact by our multi-view system.
Summarily, we make the following contributions.
• A regression-optimization framework for reconstruct-ing hand-object contacts and physical correlation from monocular images guided by stability;
• A hand-object representation and learning strategy based on ellipsoid primitives, which brings conve-nience to the process of both deep learning inference and physical simulation;
• A hand-object interaction dataset containing physical attributes and stability metrics, which validates the sim-to-real consistency of related methods.
The dataset and codes will be publicly available at https:
//www.yangangwang.com. 2.