Abstract
Domain adaptive object detection (DAOD) is a promis-ing way to alleviate performance drop of detectors in new scenes. Albeit great effort made in single source domain adaptation, a more generalized task with multiple source domains remains not being well explored, due to knowl-edge degradation during their combination. To address this issue, we propose a novel approach, namely target-relevant knowledge preservation (TRKP), to unsupervised multi-source DAOD. Speciﬁcally, TRKP adopts the teacher-student framework, where the multi-head teacher network is built to extract knowledge from labeled source domains and guide the student network to learn detectors in unlabeled target domain. The teacher network is further equipped with an adversarial multi-source disentanglement (AMSD) module to preserve source domain-speciﬁc knowledge and simultaneously perform cross-domain alignment. Besides, a holistic target-relevant mining (HTRM) scheme is de-veloped to re-weight the source images according to the source-target relevance. By this means, the teacher network is enforced to capture target-relevant knowledge, thus ben-eﬁting decreasing domain shift when mentoring object de-tection in the target domain. Extensive experiments are con-ducted on various widely used benchmarks with new state-of-the-art scores reported, highlighting the effectiveness. 1.

Introduction
In the past decade, convolutional neural networks [11,26, 37] (CNNs) have achieved great progress and delivered sig-niﬁcant improvement in visual object detection [18, 20, 24].
*Corresponding author.
Unfortunately, the well-built detectors suffer from remark-able performance drop when applied to unseen scenes due to domain shift [39, 47]. Because it is rather expensive and time-consuming to annotate newly collected data, domain adaptive object detection (DAOD) [3,5,47] has been receiv-ing increasing attention. It originates from unsupervised do-main adaptation (UDA) [1, 6, 30], which proves effective in transferring knowledge from the learned domain (known as source domain) to a novel domain (known as target domain) with only unlabeled image for classiﬁcation. Compared to UDA, DAOD is even more challenging as it simultane-ously locates and classiﬁes all instances of different objects in images with domain shift, requiring generating domain-invariant representations to reduce such a discrepancy in the presence of complex foreground and background variations.
Many efforts have been made on DAOD in the literature, and the methods mainly address it in the paradigm of adver-sarial feature alignment [15, 25, 39, 47] or semi-supervised learning [2, 5, 43]. The former directly aligns the features in the source and target domains through adversarial discrimi-nator confused by gradient reversal layer [25,47], and it can be fulﬁlled at the image-level [3, 15], instance-level [3, 25] or/and category-level [39, 47]. The latter predicts pseudo labels according to the model trained in the source domain and adopts them as guidance to the target domain [2,5], and the domain gap can be bridged through enforcing the model consistency. Both the two types of methods show promising results in DAOD for a single pair of source and target.
Multi-source domain adaptation (MSDA) is considered as a more practical scenario in UDA since it assumes that various sources are available for better adaptation to the tar-get domain [12, 23, 45]. In addition to the gap between the source and target domains [12, 40, 44], MSDA also deals with the discrepancy among different sources to avoid neg-Holistic Target-Relevant Mining
Source Domain
<  𝒮(cid:3038)
<
KNN on
Instances
Target Relevance
Source Domain
<  𝒮(cid:3037)
<
Teacher Detector
Feature Extractor
Supervision of 
RoI Head 
𝒮(cid:3038)  for 
RPN
𝐻𝒮(cid:3286)
Adversarial Disentanglement
𝒮(cid:3038)
RoI Align
Backbone
RoI Head   for 
𝐻𝒮(cid:3285)
Supervision of 
𝒮(cid:3037)
𝒮(cid:3037)
Multi-Source
Knowledge Adaptation
Knowledge from 
𝒮(cid:3038)
Knowledge from 
𝒮(cid:3037)
Preserved Relevant
Knowledge for 
𝒯
Object instances   ,  from 
, 
𝒮(cid:3038)
𝒮(cid:3037)
𝒯
Predictions of 𝒮(cid:3038)
Predictions of 𝒮(cid:3037)
Target Domain
Student Detector   𝒯
Feature 
Extractor
RoI Head
𝐻𝒯
Figure 1. Framework overview of the proposed TRKP approach. The solid arrows refer to forward propagation and the dashed ones denote supervision. The teacher detector is trained on labeled source images and generates pseudo labels for unlabeled images in the target domain, which mentors the student detector. TRKP leverages the adversarial multi-source disentanglement (AMSD) module to preserve source domain-speciﬁc knowledge and the holistic target-relevant mining (HTRM) scheme to strengthen encoding target relevance knowledge, which signiﬁcantly facilitates adapting multi-source knowledge to the target domain. ative transfer [23,32]. Albeit its prevalence in classiﬁcation, the multi-source problem has seldom been investigated in detection. To the best of our knowledge, the only attempt
It follows the pipeline is recently given by DMSN [41]. that primarily assigns dynamic weights to multiple sources for alignment and then adapts the compound source to the target in MSDA [23, 46], and illustrates the necessity of knowledge of different domains to facilitate DAOD. How-ever, there exist two major limitations: (1) the divide-and-merge spindle network conducts early alignment of multiple sources, which often incurs degradation of domain knowl-edge learned in individual sources for their gaps; (2) the loss memory bank measures target-relevant knowledge in source domains by a temporary discrepancy, leading to a local op-timum. Both the facts suggest much room for amelioration.
To tackle the issues aforementioned, this study proposes a novel target-relevant knowledge preservation (TRKP) ap-proach to multi-source DAOD, aiming at enhancing target-relevant knowledge learning from different sources and re-ducing domain knowledge degradation in adaptation to the target. Speciﬁcally, TRKP performs multi-source DAOD in the teacher-student framework, where a multi-head teacher network is constructed to extract knowledge from individ-ual labeled source domains and mentor the student net-work on detector building in the unlabeled target domain (refer to Fig. 1 for an overview). To restrain knowledge degradation, the teacher network embeds an adversarial multi-source disentanglement (AMSD) module to preserve source domain-speciﬁc knowledge acquired by correspond-ing independent detection heads as much as possible during cross-domain alignment. Further, a holistic target-relevant mining (HTRM) scheme is developed to re-weight source images according to source-target relevance. By this means, the teacher network is enforced to capture and highlight target-relevant knowledge at the global level, thus beneﬁt-ing domain gap decreasing for detector adaptation in the tar-get domain. Extensive experiments are carried out on pub-lic benchmarks with state of the art performance reported, demonstrating the advantages of TRKP.
The contributions of this study are three-fold: 1) We propose a novel teacher-student network for multi-source DAOD, which alleviates target-relevant source do-main knowledge degradation for alignment through a multi-head teacher structure along with an adversarial source dis-entanglement module. 2) We propose a target-relevant mining procedure to measure relevance between the source and target domains at the global-level, substantially strengthening target-relevant knowledge acquiring from different sources. 3) We not only outperform the top counterpart by a large margin in existing protocols, but also achieve a good base-line on a harder scenario with more sources. 2.