Abstract
Image rasterization is a mature technique in computer graphics, while image vectorization, the reverse path of rasterization, remains a major challenge.
Recent ad-vanced deep learning-based models achieve vectorization and semantic interpolation of vector graphs and demon-strate a better topology of generating new figures. How-ever, deep models cannot be easily generalized to out-of-domain testing data. The generated SVGs also contain complex and redundant shapes that are not quite conve-nient for further editing. Specifically, the crucial layer-wise topology and fundamental semantics in images are still
In this not well understood and thus not fully explored. work, we propose Layer-wise Image Vectorization, namely
LIVE, to convert raster images to SVGs and simultane-ously maintain its image topology. LIVE can generate com-pact SVG forms with layer-wise structures that are seman-tically consistent with human perspective. We progressively
*Yuqian and Xingqian contributed equally. add new b´ezier paths and optimize these paths with the layer-wise framework, newly designed loss functions, and component-wise path initialization technique. Our experi-ments demonstrate that LIVE presents more plausible vec-torized forms than prior works and can be generalized to new images. With the help of this newly learned topol-ogy, LIVE initiates human editable SVGs for both design-ers and other downstream applications. Codes are made available at https://github.com/Picsart-AI-Research/LIVE-Layerwise-Image-Vectorization. 1.

Introduction
Scalable Vector Graphics (SVGs) [23], which describe images with a collection of parametric shape primitives, have recently attracted increasing attention due to the high practical value in computer graphics. Compared with raster images that present the visual concepts using ordered pix-els, vector images enjoy many advantages, like compact file size and resolution-independency. Most importantly, vector 1
images provide layer-wise topological information, which is crucial for image understanding and editing.
In the last few years, we have witnessed various achieve-ments in image-to-vector translation [3, 7, 14, 16, 24, 29], mainly due to advances in two technical directions: building powerful generation models, and employing decent differ-entiable rendering methods. These methods, despite their promising vectorization and generation ability, have always overlooked the topological information hidden behind the raster images. The missing of such information always in-curs inadequate learning of vectorization and requires su-perfluous shape primitives to make up [14, 15, 38]. Some methods attempt to resolve this dilemma by either focusing on particular simple datasets [24, 25] or employing a seg-mentation pre-processing method [7, 8], but each one has its own drawbacks and subtleties. The first line of work learns to explore the geometric information of fonts or emo-jis but cannot be generalized to broad domains. The other line that considers segmentation pre-processing method re-quires heavy pre-processing operations and would segment high-contrast texture into multiple small regions, resulting in redundancy [8]. Hence, a simple yet effective method is desired in the community to capture the layer-wise repre-sentation for image-to-vector translation.
In this paper, we introduce a Layer-wise Image
VEctorization method, termed as LIVE, to translate a raster image to vector graphics (i.e., SVG) with layer-wise rep-resentation. Different from previous works [15, 24], LIVE is model-free and requires no shape primitive labels. This property helps us to escape the regime of particular do-mains like fonts and emojis, and bypass the difficulty of
SVG dataset collection or generalization. Moreover, LIVE enjoys an intuitive and succinct learning course.
In each step, we are in pursuit of maximizing the topology explo-ration rather than only minimizing the pixel-wise differ-ence. The key insight behind this idea is that simply min-imizing the vectorization error (e.g., MSE loss between an input raster image and rendered vector graphics) for opti-mization would lead to a color mean error. We achieve this by a component-wise path initialization method and a novel
Unsigned Distance guided Focal loss function (UDF loss).
Besides, to mitigate the self-interaction issue, which always occurs in the optimization course [24], we present a novel
Self-Crossing loss (Xing loss) by adding constraints to the control points optimization.
We evaluate our proposed method for various tasks, in-cluding image-to-vector translation and interpolation across domains (e.g., cliparts, emojis, photos, and natural images) to showcase the effectiveness of LIVE. Our main contribu-tions in this work can be summarized as follows: differentiable and can generate layer-wise SVGs which are largely consistent with human perception.
• Together with LIVE, we also introduce a general ini-tialization method and novel loss functions, including
Self-Crossing loss (Xing loss) and Unsigned Distance guided Focal loss (UDF loss). These methods improve the generation of SVGs from raster images, reducing curve intersection and minimizing the shape distortion.
• Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that LIVE can generate precise and compact SVGs in various do-mains. Our SVG results surpass the results from prior works in terms of simplicity and layer-wise topology. 2.