Abstract
We focus on the task of estimating a physically plausi-ble articulated human motion from monocular video. Ex-isting approaches that do not consider physics often pro-duce temporally inconsistent output with motion artifacts, while state-of-the-art physics-based approaches have either been shown to work only in controlled laboratory condi-tions or consider simplified body-ground contact limited to feet. This paper explores how these shortcomings can be addressed by directly incorporating a fully-featured physics engine into the pose estimation process. Given an uncon-trolled, real-world scene as input, our approach estimates the ground-plane location and the dimensions of the physi-cal body model. It then recovers the physical motion by per-forming trajectory optimization. The advantage of our for-mulation is that it readily generalizes to a variety of scenes that might have diverse ground properties and supports any form of self-contact and contact between the articu-lated body and scene geometry. We show that our approach achieves competitive results with respect to existing physics-based methods on the Human3.6M benchmark [13], while being directly applicable without re-training to more com-plex dynamic motions from the AIST benchmark [36] and to uncontrolled internet videos. 1.

Introduction
Figure 1. Example results of our approach on internet videos of dynamic motions. Note that our model can reconstruct physically plausible articulated 3d motion even in the presence of complex contact with the ground: full body contact (top row), feet and hands (middle), and feet and knee contacts (bottom).
In this paper, we address the challenge of reconstruct-ing physically plausible articulated 3d human motion from monocular video aiming to complement the recent meth-ods [15, 16, 23, 42, 42, 48] that achieve increasingly more accurate 3d pose estimation results in terms of standard joint accuracy metrics, but still often produce reconstruc-tions that are visually unnatural.
Our primary mechanism to achieve physical plausibil-ity is to incorporate laws of physics into the pose estima-tion process. This naturally allows us to impose a variety of desirable properties on the estimated articulated motion, such as temporal consistency and balance in the presence of gravity. Perhaps one of the key challenges in using physics for pose estimation is the inherent complexity of adequately modeling the diverse physical phenomena that arise due to
In the recent liter-interactions of people with the scene. ature [29–31, 43] it is common to keep the physics model simple to enable efficient inference. For example, most of
second contribution, we generate technical insights such as demonstrating that we can reach excellent alignment of es-timated physical motion with 2d input images by automat-ically adapting the 3d model to the person in the image, and employing appropriate 2d alignment losses. This is in contrast to related work [29–31, 43] that typically does not report 2d alignment error and qualitatively may not achieve good 2d alignment of the physical model with the image.
We also contribute to the understanding of the use of the residual root force control [45]. Such residual root force has been hypothesized as essential to bridge the simulation-to-reality gap and compensate for inaccuracies in the physical model. We experimentally demonstrate that the use of phys-ically unrealistic residual force control might not be neces-sary, even in cases of complex and dynamic motions.
Figure 2. Examples results of our approach for scene with soft ground (top) and interaction with a chair (bottom). 2.