Abstract
Detecting abnormal events in video is commonly framed as a one-class classiﬁcation task, where training videos contain only normal events, while test videos encompass
In this scenario, both normal and abnormal events. anomaly detection is an open-set problem. However, some studies assimilate anomaly detection to action recognition.
This is a closed-set scenario that fails to test the capabil-ity of systems at detecting new anomaly types. To this end, we propose UBnormal, a new supervised open-set bench-mark composed of multiple virtual scenes for video anomaly detection. Unlike existing data sets, we introduce abnor-mal events annotated at the pixel level at training time, for the ﬁrst time enabling the use of fully-supervised learn-ing methods for abnormal event detection. To preserve the typical open-set formulation, we make sure to include dis-joint sets of anomaly types in our training and test collec-tions of videos. To our knowledge, UBnormal is the ﬁrst video anomaly detection benchmark to allow a fair head-to-head comparison between one-class open-set models and supervised closed-set models, as shown in our experiments.
Moreover, we provide empirical evidence showing that UB-normal can enhance the performance of a state-of-the-art anomaly detection framework on two prominent data sets, Avenue and ShanghaiTech. Our benchmark is freely available at https://github.com/lilygeorgescu/
UBnormal. 1.

Introduction
In spite of the growing interest in video anomaly detec-tion [11, 12, 17–19, 22–24, 27, 32, 34, 39–41, 43, 46, 52, 54, 60, 61, 64, 66], which generated signiﬁcant advances lead-ing to impressive performance levels [17, 18, 21, 27, 32, 56, 59, 60, 64, 66, 67], the task remains very challenging. The difﬁculty of the task stems from two interdependent aspects: (i) the reliance on context of anomalies, and (ii) the lack of abnormal training data. The former issue can be explained through a simple comparative example considering a truck
∗equal contribution (cid:5)corresponding author driven on a street, which is normal, versus a truck driven in a pedestrian area, which is abnormal. The reliance on context essentially generates an unbounded set of possible anomaly types. Coupled with the difﬁculty of collecting sufﬁcient data for certain anomaly types (it is not ethical to ﬁght or hurt people just to obtain video examples), the reliance on context makes it nearly impossible to gather abnormal train-ing data.
In the recent literature, we identiﬁed two distinct formu-lations to deal with the difﬁculty of the video anomaly de-tection task. On the one hand, we have the mainstream for-mulation, adopted in works such as [2, 9–11, 14, 20, 23, 25, 27, 29, 30, 33, 35, 37, 38, 41, 43, 44, 47, 48, 50, 51, 56, 61, 62, 68–70], treating anomaly detection as a one-class classiﬁca-tion (or outlier detection) task. In this formulation, training videos contain only normal events, while test videos encom-pass both normal and abnormal events. Under this scenario, methods learn a model of normality from familiar events, labeling unfamiliar events as abnormal at inference time.
While framing anomaly detection as an outlier detection task preserves the open-set characteristic of anomaly types, the models proposed under this formulation usually obtain lower performance rates, as they lack knowledge of abnor-mal examples. On the other hand, we have the alternative formulation, considered in works such as [15,42,57,67,71], treating anomaly detection as a weakly-supervised action recognition task, where training videos contain both normal and abnormal events, but the annotation is provided at the video level. This formulation corresponds to a closed-set evaluation scenario where training and test anomalies be-long to the same action categories, failing to test the capa-bility of systems at detecting unseen anomaly types.
To this end, we propose a novel formulation that frames video anomaly detection as a supervised open-set classiﬁ-cation problem. In our formulation, both normal and ab-normal events are available at training time, but the anoma-lies that occur at inference time belong to a distinct set of anomaly types (categories). The main advantages of posing anomaly detection as a supervised open-set problem are: (i) enabling the use of fully-supervised models due to the avail-ability of anomalies at training time, (ii) enabling the eval-can enhance the performance of the state-of-the-art multi-task learning framework on both data sets.
Interestingly, we provide empirical evidence indicating that performance gains can be achieved even without trying to close the distri-bution gap with CycleGAN. This shows that UBnormal can directly improve the performance of state-of-the-art models in the real-world.
In summary, our contribution is threefold:
• We pose video anomaly detection as a supervised open-set task, introducing UBnormal, a new data set of 29 virtual scenes with 236,902 video frames.
• We show that abnormal training videos are helpful to a variety of state-of-the-art models [6, 18, 53] for abnor-mal event detection.
• We conduct a data-centric study, showing that UBnor-mal data can bring performance gains to a recent state-of-the-art method [17] on two natural scene data sets,
Avenue and ShanghaiTech. 2.