Abstract
With the recent development of Semi-Supervised Object
Detection (SS-OD) techniques, object detectors can be im-proved by using a limited amount of labeled data and abun-dant unlabeled data. However, there are still two challenges that are not addressed: (1) there is no prior SS-OD work on anchor-free detectors, and (2) prior works are ineffec-tive when pseudo-labeling bounding box regression. In this paper, we present Unbiased Teacher v2, which shows the generalization of SS-OD method to anchor-free detectors and also introduces Listen2Student mechanism for the un-supervised regression loss. Specifically, we first present a study examining the effectiveness of existing SS-OD methods on anchor-free detectors and find that they achieve much lower performance improvements under the semi-supervised setting. We also observe that box selection with centerness and the localization-based labeling used in anchor-free de-tectors cannot work well under the semi-supervised setting.
On the other hand, our Listen2Student mechanism explic-itly prevents misleading pseudo-labels in the training of bounding box regression; we specifically develop a novel pseudo-labeling selection mechanism based on the Teacher and Student’s relative uncertainties. This idea contributes to favorable improvement in the regression branch in the semi-supervised setting. Our method, which works for both anchor-free and anchor-based methods, consistently per-forms favorably against the state-of-the-art methods in VOC,
COCO-standard, and COCO-additional. 1.

Introduction
Deep learning models have achieved remarkable perfor-mance on object detection tasks in recent years, though the strong performance heavily relies on training a network with abundant images with human-annotated labels. To reduce the label supervision for training object detectors, Semi-Supervised Object Detection (SS-OD) methods have been proposed to leverage only limited labeled data but more abun-dant unlabeled data to improve performance [5, 9, 20, 26, 38].
Existing state-of-the-art SS-OD methods apply self-training techniques, which generate pseudo-labels and enforce the consistency between unlabeled data with different augmen-tations. Despite the significant improvement, there are still two remaining issues that are left untackled: (1) there is no prior SS-OD work on anchor-free detectors and (2) prior works are ineffective in pseudo-labeling on the bounding box regression.
First, anchor-free detectors have been recently getting more attention in the community of object detection [11, 15, 16, 29, 30, 37, 42], with the promise of achieving competitive accuracy, computational efficiency, and potential general-ization to new datasets or environments [37]. In spite of these advances, existing SS-OD works [9, 20, 26] mainly fo-cus on anchor-based detectors (e.g., Faster-RCNN [21] and
SSD [19]) but do not empirically verify their effectiveness on anchor-free detectors. In fact, when we adapt recent state-of-the-art SS-OD methods to anchor-free detectors, we observe that, compared with its improvement on anchor-based mod-els, the improvement is much smaller on anchor-free models (see Figure 1a and Table 1). With extensive analysis pro-vided in Section 3.2, we find that some advanced techniques performing favorably in the fully-supervised setting do not work in the semi-supervised setting with limited supervi-sion. For example, the centerness score becomes unreliable for box selection under the semi-supervised setting, and the localization-based labeling method is not robust to the localization noise in pseudo-labels.
Second, following the Teacher-Student framework, the existing SS-OD works [26, 38] apply an unsupervised re-gression loss with the pseudo-boxes generated from con-fidence thresholding (i.e., a threshold on the box score).
However, we find that this approach inherits some potential issues that can be further addressed. For instance, (1) instead of using one single metric (e.g., box score or box IoU) to jointly represent the quality of four boundaries, the confi-dence/uncertainty of each boundary should be predicted in-dividually; (2) confidence in the classification branch might not be able to reflect the quality of boundary prediction on
(a) (b)
Figure 1. To improve the unsupervised regression loss, we propose (a) Listen2Student, which explicitly compares the prediction uncertainties between the Teacher and the Student and selects these instances where the teacher has lower uncertainty than the student. We then enforce the unsupervised regression loss on these selected regression pseudo-labels. (b) Anchor-free detectors are rapidly developed recently, while adapting the pseudo-labeling method on the anchor-free models results in less improvements compared with the anchor-based detectors. the regression branch. Instead, we propose to predict uncer-tainties on the regression branch to select pseudo-labels for boundary prediction; (3) Lastly, simply relying on Teacher’s confidence/uncertainty prediction to select pseudo labels for regression cannot prevent misleading instances for the
Instead, we propose to exploit the rela-regression task. tive uncertainties between the Teacher and Student to select the boundary-level pseudo-labels, in which the Teacher has lower uncertainty than the Student. Integrating the three components, we propose Listen2Student to improve the un-supervised regression loss for the SS-OD tasks, as shown in
Figure 1b.
We demonstrate that our proposed method achieves sig-nificant improvements compared to the state-of-the-art SS-OD methods when using both anchor-free and anchor-based detectors on several SS-OD benchmarks, including COCO-standard, COCO-additional, and VOC. We also provide ablation studies to examine the effectiveness of our Lis-ten2Student. We summarize the main contributions as fol-lows:
• We show the generalization of our proposed semi-supervised method on both anchor-based and anchor-free detectors. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to examine the anchor-free models on SS-OD, and we identify core issues in applying SS-OD methods on anchor-free detectors.
• We explicitly remove misleading instances in regres-sion pseudo-labels by considering relative uncertainty estimation from the Teacher and Student predictions.
We provide analyses to verify effectiveness of our ap-proach on anchor-free and anchor-based detectors.
• Based on our empirical study on anchor-free and anchor-based detectors, our method shows favorable im-provements against the state-of-the-art methods. With the proposed method, we also bridge the performance gap between anchor-free and anchor-based detectors under the semi-supervised setting. 2.