Abstract
Semi-supervised semantic segmentation learns from small amounts of labelled images and large amounts of un-labelled images, which has witnessed impressive progress with the recent advance of deep neural networks. How-ever, it often suffers from severe class-bias problem while exploring the unlabelled images, largely due to the clear pixel-wise class imbalance in the labelled images. This paper presents an unbiased subclass regularization net-work (USRN) that alleviates the class imbalance issue by learning class-unbiased segmentation from balanced sub-class distributions. We build the balanced subclass dis-tributions by clustering pixels of each original class into multiple subclasses of similar sizes, which provide class-balanced pseudo supervision to regularize the class-biased segmentation.
In addition, we design an entropy-based gate mechanism to coordinate learning between the orig-inal classes and the clustered subclasses which facilitates subclass regularization effectively by suppressing unconfi-dent subclass predictions. Extensive experiments over mul-tiple public benchmarks show that USRN achieves superior performance as compared with the state-of-the-art.
Figure 1. Motivation of our work: In semi-supervised seman-tic segmentation, the segmentation model trained using class-imbalanced labels (of the labelled data) tends to produce class-biased segmentation on the unlabelled data. We create class-balanced clusters with balanced subclass distribution, learning from which alleviates the class imbalance issue and produces class-unbiased segmentation on the unlabelled data. We obtain the class-balanced clusters by clustering pixels of each original class into multiple subclasses of similar size. Best viewed in color. 1.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims to assign a human-defined class label to each pixel of an image, which is a fundamen-tal task in the computer vision research. With the recent advance of deep neural networks [9, 19, 69], we can learn a very accurate segmentation model while a large amount of labelled training images are available. However, collecting a large amount of pixel-wise semantic labels is laborious and time-consuming, which has become a bottleneck in se-mantic segmentation research [11, 15, 39]. Semi-supervised semantic segmentation, which aims to learn from a small amount of labelled images and a large amount of unlabelled images, has been attracting increasing attention for address-ing the image annotation challenge.
*Corresponding author.
Most existing studies tackle the challenge of semi-supervised semantic segmentation by applying either consistency-training [35, 46, 47] or self-training [10, 20, 29, 43, 45, 68] to the unlabelled data. However, they often suffer from constrained segmentation accuracy largely due to the segmentation model that is trained by using the la-belled data. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the model trained using the labelled data is class biased due to the class-imbalance of the labelled data. This leads to class-biased segmen-tation of the unlabelled data which accumulates and fi-nally degrades the whole semi-supervised learning. Though a few studies [20, 64] attempt to handle the class imbal-ance issue by selecting more pseudo labels for minority classes during self-training, these pseudo labels are often noisy as they are generated from class-biased segmenta-tion. Note the class imbalance issue has been widely stud-ied in supervised learning via re-sampling [5, 6, 34, 55, 62],
re-weighting [12, 22, 38, 49] and meta-learning [49, 53, 63], but these works require labels to rectify biased predictions and are thus inapplicable to the unlabelled data in semi-supervised semantic segmentation.
In this work, we propose an unbiased subclass regular-ization network (USRN) that tackles the class-imbalance issue and regularizes class-biased segmentation by generat-ing class-unbiased segmentation. Leveraging the segmenta-tion backbone as learnt from the original class distribution,
USRN introduces an auxiliary segmentation task as super-vised by a set of class-balanced clusters for producing class-unbiased segmentation on the unlabelled data. We obtain the class-balanced clusters from the labelled data by cluster-ing pixels of each original class into multiple subclasses of similar size. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the USRN trained us-ing class-balanced clusters can produce clearly more class-unbiased segmentation for the unlabelled data. In addition, the segmentation with the original classes could be inter-fered by the segmentation with the generated subclasses due to their different convergence speeds. We design an entropy-based gate mechanism to address this issue, where the learning with the auxiliary subclasses will be stopped (i.e., no back-propagation) when the subclass predictions are less confident than the original class predictions. Exten-sive experiments over multiple public benchmarks demon-strate the effectiveness of our designed network.
The contribution of this work is threefold. First, we propose an unbiased subclass regularization network that explores class-unbiased segmentation to alleviate the class imbalance issue in semi-supervised semantic segmenta-tion. Second, we design an entropy-based gate mechanism that coordinates the concurrent learning from the original classes and the generated subclasses effectively. Third, ex-tensive experiments show the superior effectiveness of our designed network as compared with the state-of-the-art. 2.