Abstract
Omnidirectional cameras have been used widely to better understand surrounding environments. They are often config-ured as stereo to estimate depth. However, due to the optics of the fisheye lens, conventional epipolar geometry is inap-plicable directly to omnidirectional camera images. Interme-diate formats of omnidirectional images, such as equirect-angular images, have been used. However, stereo matching performance on these image formats has been lower than the conventional stereo due to severe image distortion near pole regions. In this paper, to address the distortion problem of omnidirectional images, we devise a novel subdivision scheme of a spherical geodesic grid. This enables more isotropic patch sampling of spherical image information in the omnidirectional camera space. By extending the existing equal-arc scheme, our spherical geodesic grid is tessellated with an equal-epiline subdivision scheme, making the cell sizes and in-between distances as uniform as possible, i.e., the arc length of the spherical grid cell’s edges is well regu-larized. Also, our uniformly tessellated coordinates in a 2D image can be transformed into spherical coordinates via one-to-one mapping, allowing for analytical forward/backward transformation. Our uniform tessellation scheme achieves a higher accuracy of stereo matching than the traditional cylindrical and cubemap-based approaches, reducing the memory footage required for stereo matching by 20%. 1.

Introduction
Fisheye lenses have been used to capture a wide field of view (FOV) in even more than 180◦. Stereo matching from fisheye images is an appearing combination for a better and efficient understanding of scene geometry. However, owing to fisheye lenses’ optical characteristics, the traditional stereo matching algorithm based on the pinhole camera model is invalid. For instance, the outermost edges of fisheye images are severely distorted as the angle of view increases widely. It disturbs accurate depth estimation from spherical stereo images. To enable epipolar geometry on fisheye images, projective im-age transformation, such as equirectangular projection and latitude-longitude (LL) transformation, has been utilized to estimate depth information from very wide-angle fisheye images. This additional transformation of the input images warps images to increase the image size redundantly. Thus, the computational cost and memory increase accordingly to process spherical stereo matching from fisheye images.
To estimate depth information from a pair of fisheye im-ages, fisheye images of an ultra-wide field of view need to be warped and transformed into a certain type of projec-tive image models, such as equirectangular projection and latitude-longitude (LL) transformation [15]. We can apply the conventional stereo matching algorithm that searches stereo correspondence along epipolar lines through epipolar geometry after rectifying the transformed images. Due to the excessive distortion near the horizontal poles along the stereo baseline, the accuracy of stereo matching degrades, especially around the distorted area. In addition, excessive warping of the near pole regions in the LL-transformed im-ages increases the memory footage.
In this paper, we propose a novel subdivision scheme of spherical image information in the omnidirectional camera space. Our spherical geodesic grid enables equal-epiline sub-division to achieve higher stereo matching accuracy, where the cell sizes and in-between distances are uniformly regu-larized. Our novel transformation from sphere geometry to a 2D tessellated array enables us to apply epipolar geometry to directly achieve fast, spherical stereo matching from the tessellated fisheye images. Our geodesic grid-based stereo matching runs directly on the uniformly tessellated stereo images so that our method can reduce the required memory footage by 20% without compromising depth accuracy. 2.