Abstract
Volumetric flow velocimetry for experimental fluid dy-namics relies primarily on the 3D reconstruction of point objects, which are the detected positions of tracer particles identified in images obtained by a multi-camera setup. By assuming that the particles accurately follow the observed flow, their displacement over a known time interval is a measure of the local flow velocity. The number of parti-cles imaged in a 1 Megapixel image is typically in the order of 103-104, resulting in a large number of consistent but in-correct reconstructions (no real particle in 3D), that must be eliminated through tracking or intensity constraints. In an alternative method, 3D Particle Streak Velocimetry (3D-PSV), the exposure time is increased, and the particles’ pathlines are imaged as “streaks”. We treat these streaks (a) as connected endpoints and (b) as conic section seg-ments and develop a theoretical model that describes the mechanisms of 3D ambiguity generation and shows that streaks can drastically reduce reconstruction ambiguities.
Moreover, we propose a method for simultaneously estimat-ing these short, low-curvature conic section segments and their 3D position from multiple camera views. Our results validate the theory, and the streak and conic section recon-struction method produces far fewer ambiguities than sim-ple particle reconstruction, outperforming current state-of-the-art particle tracking software on the evaluated cases. 1.

Introduction
Volumetric velocimetry techniques for fluid flows en-able the analysis of complex flow fields and their complete spatio-temporal evolution, by providing all three velocity components of the flow in discrete positions in a 3D mea-surement volume. Most volumetric methods require a min-imum of two synchronized cameras and record the posi-tions of tracers over time as they follow the flow. The most common approaches are 3D Particle Tracking Velocimetry (3D-PTV) [14] and Tomographic Particle Image Velocime-Figure 1. Epipolar and epipolar tangency constraints for conic section segments reduce the reconstruction ambiguities, “ghosts”, in 3D flow reconstruction from streaks. try (Tomo-PIV) [4]. In 3D-PTV, the tracer particles are re-constructed in 3D space by triangulation, while in Tomo-PIV a light intensity field is reconstructed tomographically.
Both methods result in “ghost particles”, which are consis-tently reconstructed particles for which it remains undecid-able whether they are real or artifacts of the reconstruction process. The tracer density in these applications is in the order of 103-104 particles in a 1 Mpx image, resulting in a large number of ghost particles if left untreated.
There are several ways to reduce the number of ghost particles and improve the reconstruction quality: increas-ing the number of cameras, reducing the seeding density of tracer particles, or rejecting particles using criteria such as their intensity, estimated velocity, or trajectory smooth-ness (e.g. [19]). Still, triangulating particles independently in time, frame-by-frame, results in a loss of information which needs to be recovered using assumptions about the flow field. Handling regions with large velocity differences remains a challenge, as the particle displacement assump-tions often fail to eliminate ghost tracks [20].
A less common variant of 3D-PTV is 3D Particle Streak
Velocimetry (3D-PSV), where the cameras’ exposure time is increased, so that the tracer particles’ pathlines over the exposure time are recorded as “streaks” [2, 15, 16, 24].
Therefore, the tracking information is retained in a single image and can be used in the triangulation step to eliminate some of the reconstruction ambiguities. Furthermore, the displacement of both fast and slow-moving particles is en-coded in the streaks, rendering the method inherently suited to reconstructing flows with a high dynamic velocity range.
Therefore, we ask the question, by how much can the num-ber of ambiguous,“ghost”, reconstructions be reduced by using the topological information inherently contained in long-exposure images?
We initially treat the streaks as line segments defined by their endpoints and develop a theoretical model that describes how and by how much the number of recon-struction ambiguities is reduced when reconstructing linear streaks instead of points (Sections 3.2.2, 3.2.3). In a sec-ond stage, we model the streaks as projections of conic sec-tion segments and show that the probability of ghost streak generation is further reduced by imposing correspondence constraints for conic sections over multiple views (Section 3.2.4). Finally, we propose a new method for establishing multi-view matches among conic section segments while satisfying an endpoint correspondence constraint (Section 3.3). We validate our models and reconstruction method on synthetic data (Sections 4.1, 4.2) and test our reconstruction method on experimental data (Section 4.3).
Our theory and validation results fully agree, and ghost reconstructions are virtually eliminated when reconstruct-ing a realistic flow field. Experimental results confirm the practical value of our reconstruction method. Therefore, our work challenges the established preference for point recon-struction and provides theoretical argumentation for why using topological connectivity is beneficial in reducing the number of ghost particles in flow reconstruction. 2.