Abstract
An object’s interior material properties, while invisible to the human eye, determine motion observed on its sur-face. We propose an approach that estimates heterogeneous material properties of an object from a monocular video of its surface vibrations. Specifically, we show how to es-timate Young’s modulus and density throughout a 3D ob-ject with known geometry. Knowledge of how these val-ues change across the object is useful for simulating its motion and characterizing any defects. Traditional non-destructive testing approaches, which often require expen-sive instruments, generally estimate only homogenized ma-terial properties or simply identify the presence of defects.
In contrast, our approach leverages monocular video to (1) identify image-space modes from an object’s sub-pixel mo-tion, and (2) directly infer spatially-varying Young’s modu-lus and density values from the observed modes. We demon-strate our approach on both simulated and real videos. 1.

Introduction
The subtle motions of objects around us are clues to their physical properties. Among such properties are stiffness and density, which dictate how an object will respond to environmental forces. As humans, we can vaguely charac-terize how stiff or heavy a material is, such as when we infer that a rubber basketball will bounce higher than a ceramic bowling ball by tapping on its surface. Most engineering ap-plications, however, require a greater level of detail, such as when an aeronautical engineer must faithfully simulate how an airplane wing will react to wind turbulence. In computer vision and graphics, a full characterization of an object’s material properties allows one to faithfully simulate its be-havior. These scenarios require non-destructive testing to obtain physical properties of the object without altering it.
We propose visual vibration tomography, a method to estimate material properties of an object directly from vi-bration signals extracted from monocular video. Much of non-destructive testing (NDT) has focused on measuring vi-brations to identify the presence of defects in structures with a known geometry. However, NDT tools are not generally used to determine the precise spatial distribution of physical properties in objects with a heterogeneous interior structure.
We show that we can measure vibrations as sub-pixel motion in 2D video and then use this motion to constrain 3D material-property estimation. Videos have several advan-tages over existing NDT techniques: while contact sensors and laser vibrometers take point measurements, videos offer
spatially dense measurements of surface vibrations. While laser vibrometers are expensive and specialized, cameras are ubiquitous and general-purpose. While existing image-based techniques require stereo cameras for 3D motion tracking, our method shows that in many cases, a monoc-ular view is all you need.
Our motivating insight is that, under fixed geometry, an object’s material properties determine its motion. The in-verse direction is also true: motion determines material
If the motion is small, properties up to a scaling factor. it can be decomposed into independent modes at natural frequencies, lending itself to a concise mathematical equa-tion linking modes and material properties. This link lays the foundation for our physics-constrained optimization ap-proach. The key challenge of our task is to deal with incom-plete and 2D (as opposed to full-field) modes. Despite these challenges, we show that we can estimate material proper-ties from image-space motion and recover full-field modes.
In this paper, we first review related work and the the-oretical relationship between modes and material proper-ties. We then show how to extract image-space modes from video and recover material properties (Fig. 1 shows an overview of the method). We demonstrate our approach on simulated data of 3D geometries and discuss the effects of damping and model mismatch. Finally, we present proof-of-concept experiments on real data, showing that we are able to image the shape of unseen material inhomogeneities on drum heads and the presence of a defect in a real 3D
Jello cube. These experiments demonstrate promise for the future of the approach in more challenging environments. 1 2.