Abstract
The reconstruction of cortical surfaces from brain mag-netic resonance imaging (MRI) scans is essential for quan-titative analyses of cortical thickness and sulcal morphol-ogy. Although traditional and deep learning-based algo-rithmic pipelines exist for this purpose, they have two major drawbacks: lengthy runtimes of multiple hours (traditional) or intricate post-processing, such as mesh extraction and topology correction (deep learning-based).
In this work, we address both of these issues and propose Vox2Cortex, a deep learning-based algorithm that directly yields topo-logically correct, three-dimensional meshes of the bound-aries of the cortex. Vox2Cortex leverages convolutional and graph convolutional neural networks to deform an initial template to the densely folded geometry of the cortex repre-sented by an input MRI scan. We show in extensive exper-iments on three brain MRI datasets that our meshes are as accurate as the ones reconstructed by state-of-the-art meth-ods in the field, without the need for time- and resource-intensive post-processing. To accurately reconstruct the tightly folded cortex, we work with meshes containing about 168,000 vertices at test time, scaling deep explicit recon-struction methods to a new level. 1.

Introduction
Over the last years, fully-convolutional neural networks (F-CNNs) have been introduced for the automatic whole-brain segmentation of MRI scans. Architecture choices range from multi-view 2D F-CNNs [17, 43] and patch-based 3D F-CNNs [18] to full-size 3D F-CNNs [41].
In contrast to time-consuming traditional methods for brain analysis, such networks perform the segmentation in sec-onds. The resulting voxel-based segmentation can be ade-quately used for volume measurements of the whole brain or subcortical structures. However, the cerebral cortex, a thin and highly-folded sheet of neural tissue of the brain,
∗: Equal contribution, †: Corr. author (fabi.bongratz@tum.de)
Figure 1. Coronal slices of a brain MRI scan with overlays of mesh- and voxel-based segmentation, and 3D renderings of corre-sponding pial and white matter (WM) surfaces. The top row shows meshes generated by our method, the bottom row shows meshes generated by applying marching cubes on the voxel segmentation.
Marching cubes meshes clearly show stair-case artifacts. is not well captured by voxel-based segmentations since
Instead, cortical surfaces it is just a few voxels thick. have been reconstructed as triangular meshes [9] to capture the intrinsic two-dimensional structure, which enables ac-curate measurements like thickness, volume, and gyrifica-tion. Such in-vivo measurements have not only been im-portant for studying higher-level processes like conscious-ness, thought, emotion, reasoning, language, and mem-ory [39, 44], but also for detecting cortical atrophy in nu-merous brain disorders like Alzheimer’s disease [27] and schizophrenia [25].
The current standard for cortical surface reconstruction is FreeSufer [5, 9], which produces smooth, accurate, and topologically correct surface meshes but runs for several hours per scan. On the other hand, voxel-based segmen-tation algorithms are quick and their outputs can be used to obtain mesh-based surface representations using algo-rithms like marching cubes [28, 29]. However, the extracted meshes suffer from typical stair-case artifacts and their res-olution is limited by the resolution of the segmentation, re-spectively the resolution of the initial MRI scan, see Fig-ure 1. Further, the predicted segmentation might have topo-logical defects and a topology-correction algorithm needs to be applied before or after marching cubes mesh extraction, see Figure 2. This need for post-processing steps is not only cumbersome; while topology correction algorithms gener-ate meshes with the desired topology, they do not always produce anatomically correct meshes [9], see also supple-mentary Figure 4.
Recently, seminal research in the field of single-view or multi-view reconstruction [50, 52] introduced network architectures that can produce explicit surface representa-tions from 2D images by transforming a template mesh (e.g., a sphere) using graph convolutions. These methods are promising for our task, as they can enforce the desired topology of the template mesh and directly output a mesh without the need for post-processing. So far, these meth-ods have not been applied to reconstruct shapes with such complex folding patterns as the cerebral cortex.
In this work, we introduce Vox2Cortex, a deep learning-based algorithm that allows for direct reconstruction of explicit meshes of cortical surfaces from brain MRI.
Vox2Cortex simultaneously predicts white matter (WM) and pial surfaces of both hemispheres, resulting in an output of four meshes. Vox2Cortex enforces a spherical topology to prevent the formation of holes or handles in the mesh and does therefore not need post-processing like [4]. We use up to 168,000 vertices per mesh to capture the highly complex folding patterns of the cortex with high accuracy. This num-ber is substantially higher than in prior work on single-view reconstruction that typically uses less than 10,000 vertices per surface. Our main contributions are:
• Vox2Cortex is the first network specifically designed to extract explicit surface representations of the cor-tex from MRI scans using a combination of a convolu-tional neural network and a graph neural network.
• We ensure spherical topology of the generated meshes by learning to deform a template mesh with fixed topology and arbitrary resolution.
• Vox2Cortex models the interdependency between WM and pial surfaces by exchanging information between them.
• We propose a new loss function for training explicit reconstruction methods that leverages local curvature to weight Chamfer distances. It turns out that this loss is crucial for learning to reconstruct the tightly folded surfaces of the human cortex.
• We demonstrate on multiple brain datasets that
Vox2Cortex performs on par with or better than exist-ing implicit and voxel-based reconstruction methods in terms of accuracy and consistency while being 25 times faster at inference time.
Figure 2. Existing deep learning-based approaches for cortical sur-face reconstruction from MRI usually rely on an implicit or voxel representation of the cortex. Those methods require intricate post-processing steps, including topological correction and marching cubes [28, 29] to generate surface meshes. These meshes are, how-ever, crucial for downstream applications such as the measurement of cortical thickness. In contrast, our model directly yields highly accurate meshes of the WM and the pial surfaces.
The main objective of our work is to develop a fast and highly accurate reconstruction of the cortex, which has high clinical value. Nevertheless, our contributions to predicting multiple, tightly folded meshes are generic and can also be applied to other applications. Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/ai-med/Vox2Cortex. 2.