Abstract
We study a new problem of detecting hands and finding the location of the corresponding person for each detected hand. This task is helpful for many downstream tasks such as hand tracking and hand contact estimation. Associating hands with people is challenging in unconstrained condi-tions since multiple people can be present in the scene with varying overlaps and occlusions.
We propose a novel end-to-end trainable convolutional network that can jointly detect hands and the body loca-tion for the corresponding person. Our method first de-tects a set of hands and bodies and uses a novel Hand-Body
Association Network to predict association scores between them. We use these association scores to find the body lo-cation for each detected hand. We also introduce a new challenging dataset called BodyHands containing uncon-strained images with hand and their corresponding body locations annotations. We conduct extensive experiments on BodyHands and another public dataset to show the ef-fectiveness of our method. Finally, we demonstrate the ben-efits of hand-body association in two critical applications: hand tracking and hand contact estimation. Our experi-ments show that hand tracking and hand contact estima-tion methods can be improved significantly by reasoning about the hand-body association. Code and data can be found at http://vision.cs.stonybrook.edu/
˜supreeth/BodyHands/ 1.

Introduction
Hand analysis is an important problem in Computer
Vision with applications in human understanding, action, gesture, and sign-language recognition. The visual anal-ysis of human hands is also vital for Augmented & Vir-tual Reality applications. Although the Computer Vi-sion community has studied problems such as hand detec-tion [7, 13, 23, 24, 30, 39, 49, 58, 59], hand pose estima-tion [17, 44, 51, 66, 67], hand tracking [48, 52, 53, 55, 63], and hand contact estimation [5, 33, 36, 47], there has been no significant effort in studying hand-body association.
Figure 1. Hand Detection & Hand-Body Association. We de-velop a method to detect hands and their corresponding body loca-tions. Hands and bodies belonging to the same person have bound-ing boxes in the same color and identification numbers.
In this work, we study the problem of detecting hands in an image and finding the location of the correspond-ing person for each detected hand. This task is useful for action recognition and scene understanding, especially for multiple-person images and videos. For example, it is help-ful to identify people when understanding hand gestures in human-human communication. Another example is to as-sess the motor and social skills of children with mental dis-orders by tracking their hands and how hands interact with objects and other people in a tabletop game. Hand-body as-sociation helps develop safety applications and assists peo-ple working with hand-held tools in manufacturing settings.
Detecting hands and associating them with suitable bod-ies is challenging in unconstrained conditions. As shown in Fig. 1, an image may contain multiple people with sub-stantial overlaps and occlusions between hands and bodies.
One approach is to detect hands and people separately and use heuristics based on their sizes, distances, or overlap-ping areas to establish correspondences between hands and bodies. However, such methods do not perform well due to the extreme articulation of hands and bodies, leading to tremendous variations in the relative locations and sizes be-tween a hand and the corresponding human body. An al-ternative method is to use a human pose detector to find
the skeleton of humans and find the hands of each detected pose in the image. However, pose detection by itself is un-reliable. For a scene of congregated or interacting people, the hand and arm of one person might be entangled with the skeleton of another person. Furthermore, the pose detector might not detect poses for everyone in the image, especially for people who are partially occluded or partly outside the camera’s field of view. Thus we cannot solely rely on pose detection to associate hands with people. Our experiments empirically show that pose-based approaches are unreliable for associating hands and bodies.
This work proposes a novel convolutional architecture that can jointly detect hands and bodies and associate them.
Specifically, we build upon MaskRCNN [18], a state-of-the-art object detector, and extend it by adding a novel Hand-Body Association Network module. We first use a Region
Proposal Network to generate candidate hand and body pro-posal boxes. We then use the bounding box regression and mask generation heads to obtain the bounding box and seg-mentation maps for hands and bodies. The detected hands and bodies are then passed to the Hand-Body Association
Network to obtain an association between them.
The Hand-Body Association Network has two novel modules. The first module is the Overlap Estimation Mod-ule that uses the visual features of hands and bodies to es-timate if they can overlap. Intuitively, if a hand and a body have no overlap, they cannot belong to the same person. The converse, however, does not hold; a hand and a body can overlap even though they belong to different people. For in-stance, in the proposed BodyHands dataset, more than 33% of the people have their hands overlapping with other peo-ple. The overlap is a piece of mutual geometric informa-tion between two regions. Learning mutual geometric in-formation between hands and bodies using their appearance features allows learning-rich discriminative representations useful for associating hands and bodies. The second mod-ule is the Positional Density Module that uses hand features to estimate a density over possible body locations for each detected hand. Intuitively, the appearance and location of a hand provide some cues for estimating its body location.
However, directly locating the body from the hand can be difficult due to the tremendous variation in relative scales between hands and bodies and mutual occlusions between people. We thus first estimate a density over possible loca-tions and use these density values to find compatible match-ing for all hand-body pairs using the Hungarian Algorithm.
We also contribute a large-scale dataset of unconstrained images containing annotations for hand locations and their corresponding body locations. The dataset has around 20K images with bounding box annotations for more than 57K hand and 63K body instances. This dataset has numerous images containing multiple people with varying degrees of occlusions and overlap, where it is challenging to detect and associate hands and bodies.
Finally, we demonstrate the benefits of the hand-body association in two crucial downstream tasks: hand tracking and hand physical contact estimation. We show that hand tracking and hand contact estimation methods can be im-proved by reasoning about the hand-body association. 2.