Abstract
Establishing correspondences from image to 3D has been a key task of 6DoF object pose estimation for a long time. To predict pose more accurately, deeply learned dense maps replaced sparse templates. Dense methods also im-proved pose estimation in the presence of occlusion. More recently researchers have shown improvements by learning object fragments as segmentation. In this work, we present a discrete descriptor, which can represent the object surface densely. By incorporating a hierarchical binary grouping, we can encode the object surface very efficiently. Moreover, we propose a coarse to fine training strategy, which enables fine-grained correspondence prediction. Finally, by match-ing predicted codes with object surface and using a PnP solver, we estimate the 6DoF pose. Results on the public
LM-O and YCB-V datasets show major improvement over the state of the art w.r.t. ADD(-S) metric, even surpassing
RGB-D based methods in some cases.
Figure 1. ZebraPose assigns a discrete code to each surface ver-tex hierarchically. We project the code as binary black and white values (top) and learn them using deep neural networks. Our bi-nary descriptor allows one-to-one correspondence for the problem of 6DoF object pose efficiently. 1.

Introduction
Augmented reality and robotics are two of the main ap-plication fields of 3D computer vision. In many augmented reality applications, the location and pose of an object of in-terest has to be determined at a high precision [45,54]. Sim-ilarly, object grasping and manipulation is needed for many robotic applications (e.g. automatic manufacturing [50], co-operative assistance [9, 21]), and also demands accurate 6
Degree-of-Freedom (6DoF) object pose information. As the crucial element in both application domains, estimating the 6DoF object pose has received increasing attention from the computer vision research community.
The correspondence problem is a classical problem in
*The authors contributed equally to this paper
Code: https://github.com/suyz526/ZebraPose computer vision. While finding correspondences across the same domain is more straightforward, estimating the 6DoF object pose requires 2D-3D correspondences. In earlier ob-ject pose estimation research, depth maps came to help to match image pixels to 3D surface points [28, 64]. Due to cost and setup complications, the detection of 6DoF pose without depth information can be advantageous. However,
RGB approaches typically achieve a lower accuracy with respect to their depth-based counterparts [16, 26].
Driven by the recent developments in deep learning and
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), various methods were proposed, which make 6DoF pose estimation from a single RGB image feasible [10, 34, 53, 61, 69].
In a correspondence-based setting, to estimate the object pose,
Perspective-n-Points (PnP) algorithms require at least 4 2D-3D point matches [38]. Therefore, sparse methods are ap-plied to extract points of interest [47, 52]. However such methods might fail to find object landmarks under view-point changes, occlusion, or lack of texture. With the suc-cess of deep neural networks in image synthesis problems, researchers use such tools to generate dense correspondence maps. For instance, several methods learn UV [71] or UVW
[48, 67] values in object local coordinates. Since the net-work produces dense smooth results, certain low-level ge-ometry is lost. Moreover, neural networks tend to achieve a higher performance in classification tasks [34].
To this aim, we propose a dense correspondence pipeline that combines the concepts of handcrafted features and im-age segmentation in a hierarchical fashion for RGB-based 6DoF pose estimation. In order to design a descriptor that encodes surfaces efficiently, we use the binary numeral sys-tem. Binary-based descriptors are applied in ORB [56] and are still in use in robust SLAM applications [12]. In our work, we split the surface into halves in multiple iterations and define our vertex encoding by stacking the assigned group labels. By leveraging a hierarchical discrete represen-tation, we guarantee a compact mapping and simple learn-ing objective as a multi-label classification problem [29,34].
Moreover, learning how to encode a full sequence at once might be challenging for neural networks. Therefore, we propose a coarse to fine learning scheme. By design, our encodings on the coarse levels are continuously shared in wider object regions. As the network learns to differentiate coarse splits, we focus on finer encoding positions. With a coarse to fine loss and training strategy, we then manage to predict fine-grained surface correspondences.
In contrast to previous works where there is no guaran-teed putative correspondence [48,49,67], our encoding pro-motes direct pixel-to-surface matching just by means of a look-up table. With a simple matching and PnP-RANSAC scheme of Progressive-X [2], we outperform the state of the art in 6DoF pose on the most commonly used benchmarks w.r.t. ADD(-S) metric.
In summary, we propose ZebraPose, a two-stage RGB-based approach that defines the matching of dense 2D-3D correspondence as a hierarchical classification task. We di-vide the general two-stage approach for 6DoF object pose estimation into three components: 1) assigning a unique de-scriptor to the 3D vertex; 2) predicting a dense correspon-dence between the 2D pixels and 3D vertices; 3) solving the object pose using the predicted correspondences. We can summarize our proposed contributions in this paper related to the first two components:
• A novel coarse to fine surface encoding method as-signing the dense vertex descriptor in an efficient way, which also fully exploits traditional outlier filters used in computer vision task.
• A novel hierarchical training loss and strategy to auto-matically adjust the weights of each code position.
Extensive experiments on LM-O [3] and YCB-V [11] datasets show that our proposed approach achieves state of the art results. 2.