Abstract
Less than 35% of recyclable waste is being actually re-cycled in the US [2], which leads to increased soil and sea pollution and is one of the major concerns of envi-ronmental researchers as well as the common public. At the heart of the problem are the inefﬁciencies of the waste sorting process (separating paper, plastic, metal, glass, etc.) due to the extremely complex and cluttered nature of the waste stream. Recyclable waste detection poses a unique computer vision challenge as it requires detection of highly deformable and often translucent objects in clut-tered scenes without the kind of context information usually present in human-centric datasets. This challenging com-puter vision task currently lacks suitable datasets or meth-ods in the available literature.
In this paper, we take a step towards computer-aided waste detection and present the ﬁrst in-the-wild industrial-grade waste detection and segmentation dataset, ZeroWaste. We believe that Ze-roWaste will catalyze research in object detection and semantic segmentation in extreme clutter as well as appli-cations in the recycling domain. Our project page can be found at http://ai.bu.edu/zerowaste/ 1.

Introduction
As the world population grows and becomes increas-ingly urbanized, waste production is estimated to reach 2.6 billion tonnes a year in 2030, an increase from its current level of around 2.1 billion tonnes [28]. Efﬁcient recycling
*dbash@bu.edu strategies are critical to reduce the devastating environmen-tal effects of rising waste production. Materials Recovery
Facilities (MRFs) are at the center of the recycling process.
These facilities are where the collected recyclable waste is sorted into separate bales of plastic, paper, metal and glass (and other sub-categories). Even though the MRFs utilize a large number of machines alongside manual labor [24], the recycling rates as well as the proﬁt margins stay at undesir-ably low levels (e.g. less than 35% of the recyclable waste actually got recycled in the United States in 2018 [2]). An-other crucial aspect of manual waste sorting is the safety of the workers, who risk their health daily getting exposed to dangerous and unsanitary objects (e.g. knifes, medical needles). At the same time, the extremely cluttered nature of the waste stream makes automated waste detection (i.e. detection of waste objects that should be removed from the conveyor belt) very challenging to achieve.
Recent advances in object classiﬁcation and segmen-tation provide a great opportunity to make the recycling process more efﬁcient, more proﬁtable and safer for the workers. Unfortunately, the research community is lacking the high-quality in-the-wild datasets to train and evaluate the classiﬁcation and segmentation algorithms for industrial waste sorting. While several companies do development in the automated waste sorting space (e.g. [49, 50, 57]), they keep their data private, and the few existing open-source datasets [38, 48, 54, 60] are very limited in the amount of data and/or are generated in uncluttered environments, not representing the complexity of the domain (see Figure 1).
In this paper, we propose the largest openly available in-the-wild waste detection dataset ZeroWaste that is speciﬁcally designed for evaluating label-efﬁcient industrial
Figure 1. Left: examples of the existing waste detection and classiﬁcation datasets (top to bottom): Trash Annotation in Context (TACO) [48], Labeled Waste in the Wild [54], ReSortIT [31] datasets. Right: footage of the waste sorting process at a real Materials
Recovery Facilities (MRF). The domain shift between the simpliﬁed datasets with solid background and little to no clutter and the real images of the conveyor belt from the MRF, as well as the object-centric nature of the existing datasets, makes it impossible to use models trained on these datasets for automated detection on real waste processing plants. In this paper, we propose a new ZeroWaste dataset collected from a real waste sorting plant. Our dataset includes a set of densely annotated frames for training and evaluation of the detection and segmentation models, as well as a large number of unlabeled frames for semi- and self-supervised learning methods. We also include frames of the conveyor belt before and after manual collection of foreground objects to facilitate research on weakly supervised detection and segmentation. Please see Figure 2 for the illustration of our ZeroWaste dataset. waste detection. ZeroWaste is a dataset that is fundamen-tally different from the popular detection and segmentation benchmarks: high level of clutter, presence of highly de-formable and translucent objects, as well as a ﬁne-grained difference between the object classes – all these aspects pose a unique challenge for the automated vision. In ad-dition to that, due to the ever-changing nature of the stream, content and visual qualities of the stream are often MRF-speciﬁc and highly depend on the season, therefore the de-tection algorithm must be label-efﬁcient and able to learn and adapt to the changes in the stream with only a few la-beled examples. We envision that our open-access dataset will allow researchers to develop more robust and data-efﬁcient algorithms for object detection and other related problems beyond human-centric domains. We summarize our contributions as follows: 1. We propose the ﬁrst fully-annotated ZeroWaste-f dataset
The
ZeroWaste-f dataset presents a challenging real-industrial waste object detection. life computer vision problem of detecting highly de-formable objects in severely cluttered scenes. In addi-tion to the fully annotated frames from ZeroWaste-f set, we include the unlabeled ZeroWaste-s set for semi-supervised learning. We also propose a version of our ZeroWaste data augmented with objects from the
TACO [48] dataset, ZeroWasteAug, to combat class imbalance. We show that introduction of object augmen-tation signiﬁcantly improves the segmentation quality of the rare classes. 2. We introduce a novel before-after data collection setup and propose the ZeroWaste-w dataset for binary clas-siﬁcation of frames before and after the collection of target objects. This binary classiﬁcation setup allows much cheaper data annotation and catalyzes further de-velopment of weakly supervised segmentation and de-tection methods. Our experimental results show that meaningful foreground segmentation can be achieved using ZeroWaste-w, however, more efﬁcient weakly-Figure 2. Left: example of an image from ZeroWaste-f dataset. Right: the corresponding ground truth instance segmentation. At the end of this conveyor belt, only paper objects must remain. Therefore, we annotated the removable objects of four material types as foreground: soft plastic, rigid plastic, cardboard and metal. The background includes the conveyor belt and paper objects. Severe clutter and occlusions, high variability of the foreground object shapes and textures, as well as severe deformations of objects usually not present in other segmentation datasets, make this domain very challenging for object detection. More examples of our annotated data can be found in Section 7.3 of the Appendix (best viewed in color). supervised methods are needed to reach the segmenta-tion quality achieved by fully-supervised methods. 3. We implement semi-baselines and weakly-supervised the fully-supervised detection and segmentation baselines for the ZeroWaste-f dataset and for
ZeroWaste-s and ZeroWaste-w datasets. Our results show that popular detection and segmenta-tion methods, such as Mask-RCNN, TridentNet and
DeepLabV3+, struggle to generalize to our data, which indicates a challenging nature of our in-the-wild dataset and suggests that new and more robust methods must be developed to solve the problem efﬁciently and be applied in the real waste sorting plants. 2.