Abstract 3D building reconstruction from monocular remote sens-ing imagery is an important research problem and an eco-nomic solution to large-scale city modeling, compared with reconstruction from LiDAR data and multi-view imagery.
However, several challenges such as the partial invisibil-ity of building footprints and facades, the serious shadow effect, and the extreme variance of building height in large-scale areas, have restricted the existing monocular image based building reconstruction studies to certain application scenes, i.e., modeling simple low-rise buildings from near-nadir images. In this study, we propose a novel 3D building reconstruction method for monocular remote sensing im-ages, which tackles the above difﬁculties, thus providing an appealing solution for more complicated scenarios. We de-sign a multi-task building reconstruction network, named
MTBR-Net, to learn the geometric property of oblique im-ages, the key components of a 3D building model and their relations via four semantic-related and three offset-related tasks. The network outputs are further integrated by a prior knowledge based 3D model optimization method to produce the the ﬁnal 3D building models. Results on a public 3D reconstruction dataset and a novel released dataset demon-strate that our method improves the height estimation per-formance by over 40% and the segmentation F1-score by 2% - 4% compared with current state-of-the-art. 1.

Introduction 3D building reconstruction is an important and funda-mental task for monitoring the human settlements and ur-ban environment, assessing the disasters, maintaining the
*Equal Contribution.
Figure 1. An example of the 3D building reconstruction result ob-tained from our approach. The purple, brown, pink and green col-ors denote the roof, footprint, facade and overlapped regions, re-spectively. Our method produces vector 3D model for buildings with complex shapes and an extreme variance of heights. geographical information, etc. During the past few decades, existing methods were mostly based on aerial LiDAR data
[31], which is difﬁcult to be applied to large-scale areas due to the expensive cost, low frequency, and limited coverage.
For large-scale applications, many approaches have been proposed towards building reconstruction from multi-view imagery [10]. Although the satellite images have a higher acquisition frequency and a larger coverage, the application scenarios of these methods are seriously restricted by the re-quirement of multiple homologous images over the same re-gion [20]. The monocular image based building reconstruc-tion, on the contrary, avoid such limitations and demon-strate great potential for large-scale applications, which has become an important research topic in recent years [22].
However, the limited information of a monocular image results in great challenges for 3D building reconstruction.
As shown in Figure 1, some key components such as the footprints and facades are partially invisible on these im-ages. The serious shadow effect also results in difﬁcul-ties for accurate segmentation and reconstruction of differ-ent parts of a building. Moreover, in large-scale areas, the building heights vary across an extremely wide range. It is hard to directly learn a precise height value via a deep neural network. These challenges restrict the application scene of existing studies to reconstructing simple low-rise buildings from near-nadir images [16, 22, 29, 34].
As an important prerequisite for 3D building reconstruc-tion, building footprint extraction has been extensively ex-plored over a long period. Recent studies are mostly based on deep neural networks, such as semantic segmentation or instance segmentation models [1, 22, 33]. Several studies design polygonal building segmentation approaches to pro-duce the vectorized outputs [17, 18, 19, 35]. Existing meth-ods generally achieve satisfying results for low-rise build-ings in near-nadir images, as the footprint contour is com-pletely visible without the parallax effect. However, these methods often produce poor segmentation boundaries when extracting high-rise buildings from oblique images.
Motivated by the progress of monocular depth estima-tion, various methods have been proposed for building height estimation via deep neural networks [11, 16, 22, 25, 29, 34]. These methods focus on height estimation from near-nadir images, which only take up a small proportion of the remote sensing images. For oblique or off-nadir scenes, a recent study [7] proposed a monocular height estimation method via learning the geocentric pose of buildings, which is designed for single height estimation task instead of 3D building reconstruction. Besides these limitations, all the methods mentioned above produce raster outputs. Further post-processing is required for converting such outputs into the ﬁnal vector 3D model for practical applications.
In this work, we propose a novel method for 3D build-ing reconstruction from monocular oblique remote sensing images. Our method solves the limitations of previous stud-ies via: (1) a 3D building reconstruction network that con-verts the ill-posed problem into learning the visible parts of buildings and their relations via four semantic-related and three offset-related tasks; (2) a 3D model optimiza-tion method that further integrates the network outputs for improving the height estimation and polygonization, based on the prior knowledge of the building structure. Results demonstrate that our method improves the height estimation performance by over 40% and the segmentation F1-score by 2% - 4% compared with current state-of-the-art.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• We design MTBR-Net, a multi-task building recon-struction network that effectively learns the geomet-ric property of oblique images, the key elements of buildings and their relations, producing 3D models for buildings with various heights and complex shapes.
• We propose a 3D model optimization method that in-tegrates the network outputs based on the prior knowl-edge of building structures, which further improves the height estimation accuracy and produces vector 3D models with valid shapes.
• We release a new dataset for monocular 3D building reconstruction, including oblique images of multiple views and over 200,000 annotated buildings of a wide range of heights. 2.