Abstract 3D Shape representation has substantial effects on 3D shape reconstruction. Primitive-based representations ap-proximate a 3D shape mainly by a set of simple implicit primitives, but the low geometrical complexity of the prim-itives limits the shape resolution. Moreover, setting a suffi-cient number of primitives for an arbitrary shape is chal-lenging. To overcome these issues, we propose a con-strained implicit algebraic surface as the primitive with few learnable coefficients and higher geometrical complexities and a deep neural network to produce these primitives. Our experiments demonstrate the superiorities of our method in terms of representation power compared to the state-of-the-art methods in single RGB image 3D shape reconstruction.
Furthermore, we show that our method can semantically learn segments of 3D shapes in an unsupervised manner.
The code is publicly available from this link. 1.

Introduction
Single image 3D reconstruction is a procedure of cap-turing the structure and the surface of 3D shapes from sin-gle RGB images, which has various applications in com-puter vision, computer graphics, computer animation, and augmented reality. Recent advanced methods have sub-stantially improved 3D shape reconstruction with the ad-vent of deep neural networks (DNNs). These methods can be mainly categorized based on the representation of 3D shapes into explicit-based [4, 1, 28] and implicit-based
[26, 10, 29, 12, 30] methods. Voxel-grid, as the most straightforward explicit representation, is useful in many applications. However, voxel-based methods generally suf-fer from large memory usage and quantization artifacts [37].
Polygon mesh [21, 41] has been introduced as alternative representation. However, since many polygon mesh-based methods start from a template mesh and deform it to recon-struct the target 3D shapes [41, 16], they can not produce 3D shapes with arbitrary topologies.
*equal contribution
Figure 1: The exploded view of 3DIAS representation. The 3D shapes consist of a union over the proposed constrained implicit algebraic primitives with proper attributes.
On the other hand, implicit representations can approx-imate surfaces of 3D shapes as zero-sets of continuous functions in the Euclidean space. Recent implicit-based methods have shown some promises to reconstruct arbi-trary shapes without any template. [29, 26, 40, 12, 30, 10]
These methods can be categorized into two mainstreams; isosurface-based and primitive-based methods. Isosurface-based methods generally generate a surface by employing a neural network [29, 26] as an implicit function that assigns negative and positive values or different probabilities to the points lying inside and outside the shape. However, for each time visualization, these methods require all the neural net-work parameters to extract the zero-sets by determining the sign of many sample points in 3D space. Furthermore, these representations are unsuitable for computer graphics and virtual reality applications because they require additional postprocessing like marching cubes to generate the final 3D
(a) Target (b) Quartic polynomials (c) Collection of primitives (d) After union
Figure 2: Composition of implicit algebraic surfaces. Our network approximates the target shape as a union over a set of constrained implicit algebraic surfaces. The network estimates the coefficients and the center of polynomials. Note that since the level sets for each primitive are quite different, the final surface has non-uniform level sets as shown in (d). shapes. Contrastingly, primitive-based methods approxi-mate 3D shapes by a group of primitives such as cubes [40], ellipsoids [12], superquadrics [30], and convexes [10]. De-spite their advantages in visualization and direct usage for various applications, the resolutions of reconstructed shapes are limited due to the simple topology (i.e., genus-zero) of the primitives. Consequently, approximating a 3D shape re-quires many of these simple primitives. Moreover, since the geometrical complexity varies from shape to shape, de-termining a sufficient number of primitives is challenging for an arbitrary shape.
In this paper, we propose a novel primitive-based 3D shape representation based on the learnable implicit alge-braic surfaces named 3DIAS as shown in Figure 1. Since implicit algebraic surfaces have high degrees of freedom, they can describe complex shapes better than simple prim-itives [2]. Besides, identifying an implicit algebraic primi-tive is straightforward and depends on only a few parame-ters. We apply various constraints on these primitives to fa-cilitate learning and achieve detailed appearances. We limit our primitives to the class of algebraically solvable implicit algebraic surfaces to assist fast 2D rendering and 3D visu-alization, which can be useful in many computer graphics applications. Furthermore, we develop an upper bound con-straint with an efficient parameterization to guarantee that the primitives have closed surfaces and controlled sizes. Fi-nally, we guide the primitives to cover different segments of a target shape by restricting the locations of their cen-ters. To generate these primitives, we design a DNN-based encoder-decoder that captures the information of an obser-vation (e.g., single image) and provides the parameters of the primitives. In our experiments, we show that our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods with most of the met-rics. Moreover, we experimentally demonstrate that 3DIAS can semantically learn the components of 3D shapes with-out any supervision and adjust the number of primitives by excluding the primitives with empty volumes.
We summarize, our main contributions as follows:
• We propose a novel primitive-based 3D shape repre-sentation with the learnable implicit algebraic surfaces, which can produce more complex topologies with few parameters hence appropriate for describing geometri-cally complex shapes.
• We develop various constraints to produce solvable and closed primitives with proper scales in desired lo-cations to ease learning and generate appealing results.
• We experimentally demonstrate that 3DIAS outper-forms state-of-the-art methods. Furthermore, we show that it can semantically learn the components of 3D shapes and adjust the number of used primitives. 2.