Abstract
We derive computed tomography (CT) of a time-varying volumetric scattering object, using a small number of mov-ing cameras. We focus on passive tomography of dynamic clouds, as clouds have a major effect on the Earth’s cli-mate. State of the art scattering CT assumes a static object.
Existing 4D CT methods rely on a linear image formation model and often on signiﬁcant priors. In this paper, the an-gular and temporal sampling rates needed for a proper re-covery are discussed. Spatiotemporal CT is achieved using gradient-based optimization, which accounts for the corre-lation time of the dynamic object content. We demonstrate this in physics-based simulations and on experimental real-world data. 1.

Introduction
Computed tomography (CT) aims to recover the inner structure of three dimensional (3D) volumetric heteroge-neous objects [15, 16]. CT has extensive use in many do-mains. These include medicine [14, 41], sensing of at-mospheric pollution [2], geophysics [49] and ﬂuid dynam-ics [27, 51, 52]. CT requires multi-view imaging [3, 22].
In nearly all CT approaches, the object is considered static during the multi-view acquisition. However, often the ob-ject changes while views are acquired sequentially [8, 53].
Thus, effort has been invested to generalize 3D CT to four-dimensional (4D) spatiotemporal CT, particularly in the computer vision and graphics communities
[42, 52, 53].
This effort has focused on linear-CT modalities. Linear
CT is computationally easier to handle, thus common for decades, mainly in medical imaging [19]. Medical CT of-ten exploits the periodic temporal nature of organ dynamics, to synchronize sequential acquisitions [41].
This paper deals with a more complicated model: scat-tering CT. It is important to treat this case for scientiﬁc, so-cietal and practical reasons. The climate is strongly affected
Figure 1. Multiple moving sensors image a time-varying object (cloud) from multiple-views. Tomography seeks the inner content. by interaction with clouds [13]. To reduce major errors in climate predictions, this interaction requires a much ﬁner understanding of cloud physics. Current models are based on remote sensing data that is analyzed under the assump-tion that the atmosphere and clouds are made of very broad and uniform layers. This leads to errors in climate under-standing. To overcome this problem, 3D scattering CT has been suggested as a way to study clouds [29, 30, 46].
Scattering CT of clouds requires high resolution multi-view images from space. There are spaceborne and high-altitude systems that may provide such data, such as AirM-SPI [6], MAIA [4], HARP [38], AirHARP [35] and the planned CloudCT formation [43]. These systems are so ex-pensive, that it is unrealistic to deploy them in large num-bers to simultaneously image the same clouds from many angles. Therefore, in practice, platforms move above the clouds: a sequence of images is taken, in order to span and sample a wide angular breadth (Fig. 1), but the cloud evolves meanwhile. Hence there are important reasons to derive 4D scattering CT of clouds.
We pose conditions for performing this task. These relate to temporal sampling and angular breadth, in relation to the correlation time of the evolving object. Then, we general-ize prior 3D scattering CT, to spatiotemporal recovery using data taken by moving cameras. We present an optimization-based method to reach this. The method is demonstrated both in rigorous simulations and on real data.
2. Theoretical