Abstract
Recent progress in multi-object tracking (MOT) has shown great significance of a robust scoring mechanism for potential tracks. However, the lack of available data in MOT makes it difficult to learn a general scoring mech-anism. Multiple cues including appearance, motion and etc., are limitedly utilized in current manual scoring func-tions. In this paper, we propose a Multiple Nodes Track-ing ( MNT) framework that adapts to most trackers. Based on this framework, a Recurrent Tracking Unit (RTU) is de-signed to score potential tracks through long-term informa-tion. In addition, we present a method of generating simu-lated tracking data without real data to overcome the defect of limited available data in MOT. The experiments demon-strate that our simulated tracking data is effective for train-ing RTU and achieves state-of-the-art performance on both
MOT17 and MOT16 benchmarks. Meanwhile, RTU can be flexibly plugged into classic trackers such as DeepSORT and MHT, and makes remarkable improvements as well. 1.

Introduction
Multi-object tracking (MOT) has attracted a lot of at-tention for its wide application such as surveillance, cell analysis and autonomous driving. Tracking-by-detection has emerged as the preferred paradigm to solve MOT for its simple pipeline: (i) detecting object locations, (ii) form tracks by linking corresponding detections across time [2].
In particular, the performance of the linking step, or the data association highly depends on a robust scoring mechanism.
Currently, the scoring mechanisms in most approaches only take account of the appearance feature extracted from the cropped object patches [29]. The tracking accuracy
Figure 1. The processing procedure of our methods. RTU is trained on simulated data first. After building the track tree, each possible association is evaluated by RTU to get the score. Then the tracker selects the best one. of these methods is limited due to the following reasons.
Firstly, objects across frames suffer from frequent occlu-sions and pose variation, which leads to much noise in the appearance features. Secondly, much long-term informa-tion is lost since they can not consider the temporal relation-ship. Even some works [10, 18, 32, 27] utilize multiple cues such as appearance and motion, the manual scoring func-tion is unsatisfactory when the objects are missing or oc-cluded. Moreover, the parameters of these methods should be adjusted for new scenes. A general scoring mechanism is urgently needed to adapt to various scenarios and tracking frameworks.
To solve this, neural network based scoring methods have attracted many researchers. For example, Kim et .al
[11] use a specialized gating mechanism in RNN to aggre-gate information and score tracks over time. Sheng et al.
[19] present the STCCNet based on spatial-temporal atten-tion to restrain the occlusion in tracklets. They indicate that their method is able to get more accurate scores. However, these methods suffer from the lack of available data. Be-cause of the diversity of the datasets (MOT15˜20), these methods should be retrained for each dataset. Even when using another feature extractor, they have to train the model again for adapting new types of features.
To solve the problems mentioned above, a general track-ing framework is presented by introducing three types of basic nodes to reconstruct the data association, as shown in
Fig. 1. Based on this, a transplantable Recurrent Tracking
Unit (RTU) is proposed to score tracks by utilizing multiple long-term cues. In addition, we explore the distribution of real data and generate simulated tracking data to train RTU avoiding the lack of real data. Experimental results indi-cate that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on both MOT17 and MOT16 benchmarks, and our RTU trained by simulated tracking data improves the other track-ers significantly.
This paper presents three main contributions:
• Construct a general Multiple Nodes Tracking frame-work, which can be extended to most trackers and adapts to various scenarios.
• Propose RTU to solve the scoring problem of tracks, which integrates multiple cues in a simple but efficient way. RTU is also flexibly plugged into other trackers to bring improvement.
• Present a method for generating simulated tracking data to replace real data. Based on MNT and RTU, it is easy to fuse kinds of cues in this simulated data. 2.