Abstract
Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) is a powerful technique in high-resolution atomic imaging of materials. Decreasing scanning time and reducing elec-tron beam exposure with an acceptable signal-to-noise ratio are two popular research aspects when applying STEM to beam-sensitive materials. Speciﬁcally, partially sampling with ﬁxed electron doses is one of the most important so-lutions, and then the lost information is restored by com-putational methods. Following successful applications of deep learning in image in-painting, we have developed an encoder-decoder network to reconstruct STEM images in extremely sparse sampling cases. In our model, we com-bine both local pixel information from convolution opera-tors and global texture features, by applying speciﬁc ﬁlter operations on the frequency domain to acquire initial re-construction and global structure prior. Our method can effectively restore texture structures and be robust in differ-ent sampling ratios with Poisson noise. A comprehensive study demonstrates that our method gains about 50% per-formance enhancement in comparison with the state-of-art methods. Code is available at https://github.com/ icthrm/Sparse-Sampling-Reconstruction. 1.

Introduction
Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy(STEM) has become a powerful and successful technique in the imaging of “beam stable” materials such as inorganic crys-talline samples. However, to achieve high spatial resolution better than 0.5 ˚A [2, 10], an order of magnitude for electron beam doses (typically in excess of 105 −106 e−/ ˚A2) is nec-essary, in which the high-energy electron beam may burn the materials and destroy the original structures. Therefore, the imaging capability of a STEM technique at low electron dose is critical for beam-sensitive materials. By decreasing the dwell time at a pixel (scan faster) or directly reducing
*All correspondence should be addressed to Huanshui Zhang (hszhang@sdu.edu.cn) and Renmin Han (hanrenmin@sdu.edu.cn). the electron accelerator voltage [18], we can achieve low electron dose imaging with a reduced number of electrons dashing and passing through samples in unit time [3]. How-ever, the low electron dose conﬁguration leads to another problem, i.e., the sparsity of the sampling signals and low signal-to-noise ratio.
Because the electron number per pixel determines the credibility of a pixel, given total electron doses, sparse sam-pling makes a pixel acquire more electrons, leading to a more credible pixel value. Meanwhile, for a STEM system with 200-300 keV primary beam energy, the Poisson noise dominates the noise distribution [13, 25, 14]. A one-pass sparse sampling (or partial scanning) outputs a scatter map of the true signals of a sample. Except for partial scanning, multi-pass scanning strategies are developed to further re-duce electron beam damage. To obtain the structure details, restoring missing signals from the scatter map is necessary.
Traditional reconstruction methods in sparse sampling develop from basic frequency ﬁlter to compressed sensing framework. Fourier or wavelets transform combined with amplitude ﬁlter, frequency ﬁlter, and phase drift can roughly restore the repeating structures [20, 26]. But ﬁlter meth-ods are only applicable for materials with a large range of
ﬁxed texture structures, and they can’t accurately determine the material boundaries, let alone any discrepancy between the internal structures. Compressed sensing (CS) theory
[8, 5, 4] offers an alternative idea to overcome the limita-tion. CS makes the assumption that a set of signals is able to be represented by a suitable basis in an extremely sparse form if the system satisﬁes several preliminaries. And if the sensing matrix obeys i.i.d Bernoulli distribution given a sparse rate, CS theory guarantees the feasibility and efﬁ-ciency of image restoration. To achieve satisfying results,
Traditional CS methods such as Group-based Sparse Rep-resentation (GSR) [28] and Beta Process Factor Analysis (BPFA) [29] require almost a dozen hours’ execution time, which can’t meet the practical need of real-time imaging.
Due to the limitation of execution speed, convolution neural network (CNN) based methods are recently pro-posed [16, 1, 23, 11, 24, 27, 19]. Well-trained networks
have replaced the “endless” iterations with just one for-ward propagation, making the real-time imaging of low-dose STEM possible. These methods mainly inpaint the missing information by exploring the texture features from local patches. However, without strict theoretical guaran-tee, CS-based deep learning methods perform not well on inpainting problem in extremely sparse sampling cases, es-pecially for real-world data with Poisson noise. Meanwhile, most networks adopt block-based linear mapping as initial reconstruction, which signiﬁcantly limits receptive ﬁeld and loses the ability of global information extraction.
Here, we propose a novel Frequency-Spatial Hybrid Net-work (FSHNet) to restore STEM images at an extremely low sampling rate, for example, atomic-scale STEM imag-ing with a sampling rate lower than 5%, which is impossible to be achieved by traditional methods. In FSHNet, the fre-quency domain information is ﬁltered to ensure global sim-ilarity, and the detailed spatial domain information is cap-tured with convolution operators to polish the local struc-ture. By combining the global structure features from fre-quency ﬁlter and the local pixel information from convo-lution operators, FSHNet can achieve a complete structure restoration with clearer local details. Comprehensive exper-iments on the synthetic and real-world datasets show that our method gains ∼50% performance enhancement.
In summary, our main contributions are:
• A novel architecture that is able to utilize both the global structure feature and local pixel information in image inpainting.
• An approach to deﬁne a structure prior from frequency-domain to guide the inpainting.
• Introducing an adaptive non-local patches matching module to enhance image inpainting performance and alleviate irregular artifact.
• A general procedure for the simulation of STEM sam-pling and imaging. 2.