Abstract
Source codes are available at https://github.com/
InterDigitalInc/latent-transformer.
High quality facial image editing is a challenging prob-lem in the movie post-production industry, requiring a high degree of control and identity preservation. Previous works that attempt to tackle this problem may suffer from the en-tanglement of facial attributes and the loss of the person’s identity. Furthermore, many algorithms are limited to a cer-tain task. To tackle these limitations, we propose to edit facial attributes via the latent space of a StyleGAN gen-erator, by training a dedicated latent transformation net-work and incorporating explicit disentanglement and iden-tity preservation terms in the loss function. We further intro-duce a pipeline to generalize our face editing to videos. Our model achieves a disentangled, controllable, and identity-preserving facial attribute editing, even in the challenging case of real (i.e., non-synthetic) images and videos. We conduct extensive experiments on image and video datasets and show that our model outperforms other state-of-the-art methods in visual quality and quantitative evaluation. 1.

Introduction
Facial attribute editing is a crucial task for photo retouch-ing or in the film post-production industry. For example, many actors are retouched for beautification or other spe-cial makeup effects. For such tasks, it is highly desirable for artists to be able to control a facial attribute without affecting other informations. Consequently, a face editing method should rely on disentangled attributes and permit identity-preserving manipulations.
Earlier works based on deep learning focus on encoder-decoder based architectures [8, 17]. Despite the improve-ments in quality of recent results, these approaches are lim-ited in resolution and generate noticeable artifacts on high resolution images. Therefore, they are not appropriate for high quality video editing. In addition, these methods are difficult to control, because the modification of one facial
attribute tends to modify other attributes. 2.