Abstract
The performance of surface registration relies heavily on the metric used for the alignment error between the source and target shapes. Traditionally, such a metric is based on the point-to-point or point-to-plane distance from the points on the source surface to their closest points on the target surface, which is susceptible to failure due to instability of the closest-point correspondence. In this paper, we propose a novel metric based on the intersection points between the two shapes and a random straight line, which does not as-sume a specific correspondence. We verify the effectiveness of this metric by extensive experiments, including its direct optimization for a single registration problem as well as un-supervised learning for a set of registration problems. The re-sults demonstrate that the algorithms utilizing our proposed metric outperforms the state-of-the-art optimization-based and unsupervised learning-based methods. 1.

Introduction
Rigid registration aligns a source shape S with a target shape T by applying a rigid transformation (R, t), where
R ∈ R3×3 is a rotation matrix and t ∈ R3 is a translation vector. It is an important task in numerous applications such as 3D scene reconstruction and localization. The transfor-mation is often computed by minimizing a function that measures the alignment error. In practice, the shapes are often represented as point clouds, and the alignment error is measured using a distance metric D(·, ·) evaluated between the points on the source surface and their corresponding points on the target surface: h(R, t) = (cid:88) (x,y)∈C
D((cid:101)x, y), (1) where C is the set of corresponding points between S and
T , and (cid:101)x denotes the new position of x after the transfor-mation. To perform registration in this way, we must first define the corresponding point. Many traditional methods
*Corresponding author such as the iterative closest point (ICP) algorithm [6] defines yσ(i) as the current closest point to xi, which needs to be updated in each iteration along with the transformation. It is easy for such iterations to fall into a local optimal solu-tion, especially when noises, outliers, and partial overlaps in the point clouds. Some methods [17, 32, 13, 48] compute local shape descriptors for some sample points, and find the corresponding point on the target surface by matching the descriptors. However, the ambiguity of these hand-crafted descriptors can make them challenging to match, especially for the point clouds with noises and outliers.
Besides point correspondence, another key component of the alignment error measure in Eq. (1) is the distance metric
D(·, ·) between the corresponding pairs. Traditional ICP methods [6, 8] use the ℓ2-norm of the point-to-point or point-to-plane distance as the metric, where D(xi, yσ(i)) is the squared Euclidean distance from xi to yσ(i) or to the tangent plane of T at yσ(i). To accommodate noise, outliers, and partial overlaps, other methods [7, 5, 48, 46] applied a robust function to the distance values to disregard or down-weight erroneous corresponding pairs. Although such strategies are more robust against noise and partial overlaps, they still rely on the correct point correspondence to some extent.
In this work, we propose an alignment error metric that does not rely on accurate point correspondence. Our key idea is to intersect the source and target shapes with a random straight line that is uniformly distributed in their bounding sphere. We locate the intersection points from the source shape and the target shape, and use the distance between them as a proxy for the alignment error. We apply Welsch’s function [15] to the distance values to obtain a robust mea-sure, and compute its expected value as our alignment error metric. Different from traditional methods, our approach does not assume a specific correspondence rule while still attaining rich information about the alignment from multiple directions thanks to the uniform distribution of the straight lines. Using our metric, optimization-based registration is less susceptible to getting stuck at a local minimum and more likely to obtain a robust solution.
Recently, various deep learning-based approaches for rigid registration have been proposed [49, 39, 40, 16]. How-Figure 1. We propose an error metric for rigid registration based on the intersection between the input shapes and random straight lines that are uniformly distributed. Top: registration by minimizing an error metric based on the Chamfer distance leads to a sub-optimal result.
Bottom: with our new metric, the optimization becomes more robust to the local minimum and identifies the correct alignment. ever, most of them train the network in a supervised manner and require ground-truth alignment. Our proposed metric can also be used to replace the ground-truth labels and allow a supervised framework to be trained on unlabeled data. It also can fine-tune the model trained by a supervised metric for use on unlabeled datasets in the real world.
In summary, the main contributions of our work are:
• We propose a novel error metric for rigid alignment based on intersections between the input shapes and a uniform random straight line, which can improve the robustness of optimization-based rigid registration.
• We use the proposed metric to turn various supervised learning frameworks into unsupervised ones that can be trained on real unlabeled data. 2.