Abstract
The recent progress of CNN has dramatically improved face alignment performance. However, few works have paid attention to the error-bias with respect to error distribu-tion of facial landmarks. In this paper, we investigate the error-bias issue in face alignment, where the distributions of landmark errors tend to spread along the tangent line to landmark curves. This error-bias is not trivial since it is closely connected to the ambiguous landmark labeling task. Inspired by this observation, we seek a way to lever-age the error-bias property for better convergence of CNN model. To this end, we propose anisotropic direction loss (ADL) and anisotropic attention module (AAM) for coor-dinate and heatmap regression, respectively. ADL imposes strong binding force in normal direction for each landmark point on facial boundaries. On the other hand, AAM is an attention module which can get anisotropic attention mask focusing on the region of point and its local edge connected by adjacent points, it has a stronger response in tangent than in normal, which means relaxed constraints in the tan-gent. These two methods work in a complementary man-ner to learn both facial structures and texture details. Fi-nally, we integrate them into an optimized end-to-end train-ing pipeline named ADNet. Our ADNet achieves state-of-the-art results on 300W, WFLW and COFW datasets, which demonstrates the effectiveness and robustness. 1.

Introduction
Face alignment, applied to facial landmark detection, has experienced tremendous improvement by means of Convo-lutional Neural Networks, and provides a continuous impe-tus for improvements in many computer vision techniques for face such as face recognition [29], face synthesis [1, 17] and face 3D reconstruction [23].
Error-bias can be treated as a special kind of AI-bias that could be resulted from the prejudiced assumptions made in the process of algorithm development or prejudices in the
*Corresponding author (a) Human (b) Baseline (c) ADNet
Figure 1. Manual annotations variance v.s. Prediction error dis-tribution on 300W dataset. (a) The variance of the manual anno-tations for each landmarks cited from 300W [36], the ellipses is colored by standard deviation normalized by face size. (b) The prediction error distribution of baseline model, each point repre-sent the relevant position between predicted landmark and its cor-responding ground truth, colored by the average NMEinterpupil / 2 of that landmark, in general face size is twice of the inter pupil. (c) The prediction error distribution of ADNet model. training data thus is an anomaly in the output of machine learning algorithms. Common AI-bias, such as race-bias and gender-bias, always causes negative ethical effects, es-pecially in the case of gender shades [5]. Different from them, the error-bias considered in this paper is more like a location uncertainty, as mentioned by [26].
In our research, error-bias is regarded as the nature of error direction and proves to be highly conducive for model understanding, thus deserving a thorough investigation to fill in the research gap.
Figure 1.(a) demonstrates the labeling-bias of landmarks location on 300W dataset, deduced by the anisotropic stan-dard deviation of each point, especially the points located on the boundary. By the observation, we trained a common face alignment model with 300W dataset, whose setting is the same as the baseline model described at the end of Sec-tion 4.2, and rendered the error distribution on the whole test dataset in Figure 1.(b), in which the error means the relative offset from predicted position to ground truth.
It is found that the error-bias exists on common face align-ment model and reaches 33% relative rate, which is highly consistent with labeling-bias in Figure 1.(a). Based on the finding, we speculate that model easier converges the error
in normal than in tangent direction because of noisy label and semantic confusion in tangent direction.
Inspired by this, in order to test the applicability, stronger and weaker constraint are respectively imposed in normal and tangent direction by the proposed ADNet instead of isotropic loss.
Similar to Figure 1.(b), the corresponding error distribution is shown in Figure 1.(c), in which the error-bias becomes higher at 48%, but the error distribution becomes compact.
To conclude, these three figures support our guideline that imposing stronger constraint to normal than to tangent.
In order to improve the localization capability of face alignment and fully leverage the error-bias, this paper pro-poses an end-to-end training framework involving devised
Symmetric Direction Loss and Anisotropic Attention Mod-ule. Specifically, Anisotropic Direction Loss disentangles the landmark errors into normal error and tangent error, and imposes strong constraint in normal error and weak con-straint in tangent error for coordinate regression, which is an improved Ln loss. Anisotropic Attention Module combines point heatmap and edge heatmap into one heatmap, which contains both landmarks information and local boundary in-formation. Applying the combined attention heatmap as a mask to the landmarks heatmap, the model has high toler-ance to tangent direction and low tolerance to normal direc-tion. These two modules are highly aligned with the pro-posed guideline. Some previous works, such as LAB [47],
PropNet [22], incorporates boundary information into CNN by attention and can be treated as special cases for the pro-posed guideline. ADNet enables both heatmap regression and coordinate regression optimization, and the anisotropic attention mask in it acts like a gabor filter supervised by both point and edge information.
The method is evaluated on several academic datasets, 300W [37], WFLW [47] and COFW [6]. All of them achieve the start-of-the-art performance, which demon-strates the effectiveness and robustness of the method.
In summary, the main contributions of this paper is as follows:
• Unveiling error-bias on error directions of face align-ment, which is highly consistent with labeling-bias by human, strong in tangent direction and weak in nor-mal direction, and based on this firstly proposing the guideline to leverage error-bias in face alignment by magnification instead of suppression.
• Devising Anisotropic Direction Loss to assign uneven loss weights to the disentangled normal and tangent error for each landmarks coordinate and magnify the error-bias by the proposed guideline.
• Proposing Anisotropic Attention Module to generate anisotropic attention mask for each landmark heatmap and magnify the error-bias again by the proposed guideline.
• Constructing an advanced end-to-end training pipeline and implementing extensive experiments on various datasets, the result outperforms other state-of-the-art methods. 2.