Abstract
The minimal geodesic models based on the Eikonal equations are capable of ﬁnding suitable solutions in vari-ous image segmentation scenarios. Existing geodesic-based segmentation approaches usually exploit the image features in conjunction with geometric regularization terms (such as curve length or elastica length) for computing geodesic paths. In this paper, we consider a more complicated prob-lem: ﬁnding simple and closed geodesic curves which are imposed a convexity shape prior. The proposed approach relies on an orientation-lifting strategy, by which a planar curve can be mapped to an high-dimensional orientation space. The convexity shape prior serves as a constraint for the construction of local metrics. The geodesic curves in the lifted space then can be efﬁciently computed through the fast marching method. In addition, we introduce a way to incorporate region-based homogeneity features into the proposed geodesic model so as to solve the region-based segmentation issues with shape prior constraints. 1.

Introduction
Image segmentation is a fundamental and challenging problem posed in the ﬁelds of image analysis and com-In the past decades, a large variety of seg-puter vision. mentation approaches have been devoted to address the re-lated segmentation problems. Among them, the energy minimization-based models integrating with priors on the target regions have proven to yield satisfactory solutions.
Prior-driven segmentation approaches. One widely con-sidered geometric prior is to assume that the target bound-aries appear to be short in terms of Euclidean curve length, by which the image noises can be suppressed in some ex-tent. Such a ﬁrst-order geometric prior has been commonly utilized in various energy minimization-based segmentation approaches such as active contours [9, 10, 38] and graph-based models [5,21]. Efﬁcient higher order geometric priors may include the curvature-penalized length term [3, 26, 43] and data-driven weighted length [32, 42]. However, utiliz-ing geometric regularity as a single prior is sometimes in-sufﬁcient to ﬁnd favorable segmentations, especially when dealing with images with complex intensity distribution. In contrast, the strategy of incorporating shape-driven priors into the objective energies can yield more accurate and ef-ﬁcient constraints for segmentation. These priors are often carried out via a statistical model about the target regions or contours [6,8,22,23,40]. The implementation of the shape-driven priors is capable of encouraging satisfactory segmen-tations, even in the absence of reliable image appearance features which are used to distinguish disjoint regions.
Recently, the shape constraints associated to the convex-ity and star convexity were regarded as ﬂexible shape priors.
Existing approaches in conjunction with these shape priors can be loosely categorized as either discrete or continuous types. In the discrete setting, the convexity prior [28], the star convexity prior [46], or geodesic star convexity [29] are characterized as a regularization term to construct the discrete energy functionals together with image data-driven terms. The energy minimization can be addressed by the graph cut algorithm [5].
In [27, 41], the convexity prior was incorporated into graph-based segmentation framework to solve multi-region segmentation tasks. The hedgehog-like shape prior [31] generalizes the geodesic star convexity constraint [27] to enlarge the applicable scope of the orig-Original Image
Region-based Geodesic
Elastica Geodesic
Proposed Geodesic Model
Figure 1. Image segmentation results respectively derived from the region-based region-based geodesic model, the EM Elastica geodesic model and the proposed elastica geodesic model with convexity shape prior. inal case. Isack et al. [30] proposed a ﬂexible k-convexity shape prior model allowing overlaps between different re-gions. However, these graph-based approaches with con-vexity constraint did not consider curvature regularization.
In the continuous setting, the convexity prior is usu-ally exploited in the active contours approaches [33, 47, 48] based on the level set formulation [39]. To be speciﬁc, in [48] the sign of the curvature was used to penalize the concave portion of the evolving contour implicitly repre-sented by a level set function. While in [33, 47], the au-thors established the relationship between the Laplacian of a level set function and the convexity property of its zero-level lines, where the shape prior redeﬁnes the searching space for optimal curve. Bae et al. [3] illustrated that mini-mizing an energy regularized by a L1-variant of Euler elas-tica length, which serves as a regularization term, is able to encourage the ﬁnal segmentation shape to be convex. How-ever, the convexity prior in this model is regarded as a way of implicit constraint, which heavily depends on the impor-tance to the respective regularization term.
Geodesic models.
The geodesic active contour mod-els [7,32,34,49] address the edge-based segmentation prob-lems by minimizing a weighted curve length via a gradient descent scheme. However, the local minimization scheme may lead to demanding requirement on the initialization and high sensitivity to spurious edges or noise. Cohen and Kim-mel [20] proposed a minimal path model to globally mini-mize a weighted curve length w.r.t. isotropic metrics [7] un-der the eikonal equation framework. In this paper, we are in-terested in ﬁnding geodesic paths with convexity shape pri-ors. In general, the weighted length of a curve can be mea-sured via a Finsler metric. Many geodesic approaches have contributed to develop various Finsler metrics to generate suitable geodesic paths in different situations [4, 13, 18, 19].
Chen et al. [12, 13] introduced to construct Randers metrics which encode region-based homogeneity features, bridging the gap between the eikonal equations and the region-based active contours. In [11, 16, 17], asymmetric metrics are ex-ploited for image segmentation using the tool of Voronoi diagram. The curvature-penalized geodesic models [14, 25] considered an idea of orientation lifting to solve the high-order geodesic computation problems. Using suitable re-laxation, the geodesic distances and geodesic paths with curvature regularization can be efﬁciently estimated by the
Hamiltonian fast marching (HFM) method [35].
Despite great advances, only the geometric priors are uti-lized in existing minimal geodesic approaches. In Fig. 1, we show a comparison example for geodesic curves de-rived from the region-based geodesic curves [12, 13], the
Euler-Mumford (EM) elastica model [14] and the proposed
In order to geodesic model with convexity shape prior. bridge these gaps, we proposed a new elastica geodesic model by integrating image features and convexity shape prior, which to our best knowledge is original. In summary, the contributions of our work are threefold:
Firstly, we introduce a new elastica geodesic approach im-posed with the constraint of the convexity shape prior. The convexity restriction of geodesic curves is carried out by the sign of their curvature, which is encoded into a new type of geodesic metrics established in an orientation-lifted space.
Secondly, we discuss the solutions for the computation of simple closed and convex geodesic paths. In numerical con-sideration, we adopt the HFM method [35] as the numerical solver, for which the stencils are adaptively generated by the proposed geodesic metric with a convexity shape constraint.
Finally, Both the region- and edge-based features are taken into account in the proposed geodesic model. The proposed model can blend the beneﬁts from the convexity shape prior, curvature regularization and region-based homogeneity fea-tures. In addition, we propose an efﬁcient way to incorpo-rate user intervention for the computation of geodesic paths and for interactive image segmentation.
The structure of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-tion 2 gives the background on the elastica geodesic model and the Eikonal active contour model. The new elastica geodesic models with convexity shape prior are presented in Sections 3 and 4. The experimental results and the con-clusion are respectively presented in Sections 5 and 6. 2.