Abstract
Ref. images
Ground Truth
GT patch
LR patch
This paper proposes a novel Attention-based Multi-Reference Super-resolution network (AMRSR) that, given a low-resolution image, learns to adaptively transfer the most similar texture from multiple reference images to the super-resolution output whilst maintaining spatial coher-ence. The use of multiple reference images together with attention-based sampling is demonstrated to achieve sig-niﬁcantly improved performance over state-of-the-art ref-erence super-resolution approaches on multiple benchmark datasets. Reference super-resolution approaches have re-cently been proposed to overcome the ill-posed problem of image super-resolution by providing additional information from a high-resolution reference image. Multi-reference super-resolution extends this approach by providing a more diverse pool of image features to overcome the inherent in-formation deﬁcit whilst maintaining memory efﬁciency. A novel hierarchical attention-based sampling approach is introduced to learn the similarity between low-resolution image features and multiple reference images based on a perceptual loss. Ablation demonstrates the contribution of both multi-reference and hierarchical attention-based sam-pling to overall performance. Perceptual and quantitative ground-truth evaluation demonstrates signiﬁcant improve-ment in performance even when the reference images devi-ate signiﬁcantly from the target image. The project website can be found at https://marcopesavento.github.io/AMRSR/ 1.

Introduction
Image super-resolution (SR) aims to estimate a perceptually plausible high-resolution (HR) image from a low-resolution (LR) input image [38]. This problem is ill-posed due to the inherent information deﬁcit between LR and HR images.
Classic super-resolution image processing [24] and deep learning based approaches [37] result in visual artefacts for large up-scaling factors (4
). To overcome this limitation, recent research has introduced the sub-problem of reference image super-resolution (RefSR) [6, 41, 46]. Given an input
⇥
CSNLN [22]
RSRGAN [42]
SRNTT [44]
AMRSR(ours)
Figure 1: The proposed network exploits NM = 4 reference images (top left) to super-resolve the LR input (top right). Its SR output has the best visual quality compared to other state-of-the-art methods.
LR image and a similar HR reference image, RefSR ap-proaches estimate a SR image. Reference super-resolution with a single reference image has been demonstrated to improve performances over general SR methods achieving large up-scaling with reduced visual artefacts.
In this paper we generalise reference super-resolution to use multiple reference images giving a pool of image features and propose a novel attention-based sampling approach to learn the perceptual similarity between reference features and the LR input. The proposed attention-based multiple-reference super-resolution network (AMRSR) is designed to allow multiple HR reference images by introducing a hierarchical attention-based mapping of LR input feature subvectors into HR reference feature vectors, focusing the learning attention on the LR input. This allows training with multiple HR reference images which would not be possible with a naive extension of existing single-reference super-resolution methods without a signiﬁcant increase in mem-ory footprint. Figure 1 qualitatively illustrates the perfor-mance of the proposed AMRSR approach against state-of-the-art single-image super-resolution (CSNLN [22], RSR-GAN [42]) and RefSR (SRNTT [44]) approaches. Given
NM reference images, AMRSR produces a 4
SR image which is perceptually plausible and has a similar level of detail to the ground-truth HR image. The primary contribu-tions of the AMRSR approach presented in this paper are:
⇥
• Generalisation of single reference super-resolution to multiple reference images whilst improving memory efﬁciency thanks to a part-based mechanism.
• Hierarchical attention-based adaptive sampling for perceptual similarity learning between low-resolution image features and multiple HR reference images.
• Improved quantitative and perceptual performance for image super-resolution compared with state-of-the-art single-image RefSR.
AMRSR is applied to both image and 3D model texture map
SR where multiple HR reference images are available. The proposed method is evaluated on benchmark datasets and demonstrated to signiﬁcantly improve performances. We introduce 3 new multiple reference SR datasets which will be made available to benchmark future SR approaches. 2.