Abstract
The increasing availability of satellite and aerial im-agery has sparked substantial interest in automatically up-dating street maps by processing aerial images. Until now, the community has largely focused on road extrac-tion, where road networks are inferred from scratch from an aerial image. However, given that relatively high-quality maps exist in most parts of the world, in practice, inference approaches must be applied to update existing maps rather than infer new ones. With recent road extraction methods showing high accuracy, we argue that it is time to transi-tion to the more practical map update task, where an exist-ing map is updated by adding, removing, and shifting roads, without introducing errors in parts of the existing map that remain up-to-date. In this paper, we develop a new dataset called MUNO21 for the map update task, and show that it poses several new and interesting research challenges. We evaluate several state-of-the-art road extraction methods on
MUNO21, and find that substantial further improvements in accuracy will be needed to realize automatic map update. 1.

Introduction
Maintaining street map datasets is an extraordinarily labor-intensive and expensive process, with several compa-nies today spending hundreds of millions of dollars annu-ally on the task [14, 15]. The cost of updating maps, cou-pled with the increasing availability of aerial and satellite imagery, has sparked much interest in automatically pro-cessing aerial images to update maps [2, 3, 8, 13, 16, 17, 18, 19, 24, 25, 29, 30, 31]. To date, most proposed meth-ods have focused on road extraction, where methods infer all roads in an aerial image. The inferred road network is generally represented as a spatial network, i.e., a graph where vertices are assigned longitude-latitude coordinates and edges correspond to detected roads. Road extraction methods are typically evaluated by comparing inferred road networks with a ground truth road network (either hand-labeled in the aerial image or taken from a map dataset).
However, inferred road networks are not directly useful: instead, in practice, inference approaches must identify po-sitions where existing maps do not reflect the current phys-ical road network, and update the map at those positions — overwriting the existing map would not be sensible since it contains street names, speed limits, tunnels, and other cru-cial features not visible from an aerial view.
A naive approach for updating maps using existing road extraction methods is to fuse inferred roads into the existing map: we can first remove redundant inferred roads that du-plicate roads already present in the map, and integrate the remaining inferred roads. However, this approach has sev-eral shortcomings: (a) connections between inferred roads and the existing map may not be inferred accurately; (b) roads in the existing map that have been physically removed or were simply incorrect will remain in the map; and (c) ar-eas where the road topology has changed (e.g., a junction modified into a roundabout) will not be updated correctly.
Thus, map update is not only more directly practical than road extraction, but also poses several new and inter-esting research challenges. We argue that, with state-of-the-art methods reporting high accuracy scores on road ex-traction (between 75% and 85% across several metrics and datasets [13, 25]), it is time for a shift in focus from road ex-traction to the more general and complex map update task.
In this paper, we develop a large-scale and compre-hensive dataset for the map update task. We call our dataset MUNO211, for MapUpdate-NAIP/OSM, since we use NAIP aerial imagery2 and OpenStreetMap (OSM) data.
MUNO21 spans regions totaling over 6000 sq km in area, spread over 21 cities across the United States. It includes time series of aerial images and map data to capture the evolution of both the physical road network and real street maps over time — we collect NAIP aerial images at each of four years over the eight-year timespan from 2012–2019, and OSM extracts from each year during the same times-pan. We focus on the US in part due to the availability of public domain aerial imagery, but also because the US is a 1The MUNO21 dataset and code are available at https://favyen. com/muno21/. 2The National Agriculture Imagery Program (NAIP) provides public domain 60-100 cm/pixel aerial imagery over the continental US.
2012 2019
Map (a) Scenario tagged Constructed: the construction of a new road is apparent in the aerial images. (b) Scenario tagged Was-Missing: a road that was not recently constructed is missing from the map. (c) Scenario tagged Deconstructed: road was physically removed. (d) Scenario tagged Was-Incorrect: a road is in the map, but the road never existed in the physical road network. (e) Scenario with multiple tags due to a road topology change.
Figure 1: Example map update scenarios in MUNO21. In map update, a method inputs an aerial image time series and an existing map (black), and produces an updated map.
We show older images on the left and newer images on the right. Green segments are not yet in the map but should be added; red segments are in the map but should be removed. good test case for map update: OpenStreetMap has good coverage and the road network includes complex topology, and at the same time, the map undergoes frequent changes: 30K km of roads are constructed each year3, and 50K km of roads are added each month to OSM in the US4.
To evaluate map update methods, we could randomly prune some fraction of roads from the most recent OSM data, and compute how accurately methods can recover the 3“Public Road Mielage”, FHWA, https://www.fhwa.dot. gov/policyinformation/statistics/2013/vmt422c.cfm 4“Total Navigable Roads per Month in US”, https://metrics. improveosm.org/ pruned roads. However, this would fail to capture several of the challenges we have discussed above, such as deleting roads from the map that were physically removed. Addi-tionally, the randomly pruned roads would not correspond to the evolution of the physical road network apparent in the aerial image time series.
Instead, we incorporate 514 real map update scenar-ios spanning 265 sq km into MUNO21 by identifying re-gions of OSM that have changed in non-negligible ways be-tween 2012–2019. We show example scenarios in Figure 1.
Each scenario consists of actual changes made to OSM, and so corresponds directly to real updates that a map update method would need to make in practice. In each scenario, we apply map update methods to reproduce the changes made to OSM: a method inputs a pre-change map and the aerial image time series, and is evaluated in terms of how accurately it reproduces the post-change map. To identify these scenarios, we develop a semi-automated annotation approach where we first automatically compare OSM data across consecutive years to identify a large number of can-didate changes, and then manually select a subset of these changes where the new map corresponds to the most recent aerial image, and where the changes are unambiguous.
We divide the dataset into 10 cities for training and 11 cities for testing. In addition to 3000 sq km of aerial im-agery and road network pairs, the training set includes 326 of the 514 map update scenarios. In these scenarios, when a change corresponds to a physical construction event that is apparent in the aerial image time series, we additionally hand-label the year when the construction is first visible, and the year when it is visibly completed. (In other sce-narios, the changes are already reflected in the oldest aerial image, even though the changes are made to the map much later, e.g., due to older construction or spurious roads in the dataset.) This training data is especially useful for im-proving accuracy on capturing updates following construc-tion activities, since the construction year annotations en-able training methods that compare aerial images over time to identify physically added and removed roads.
We evaluate five state-of-the-art road extraction and map update methods that have publicly available implementa-tions on MUNO21. We also discuss and evaluate exten-sions of existing methods for map update that leverage the additional time series training data that MUNO21 provides, which we show improves precision from 98% to 99.8% at 20% recall, but only considers changes corresponding to physical construction. Our evaluation shows that there is substantial room for improvement in accuracy on the map update problem, and we believe MUNO21 will help enable a transition in focus from road extraction to map update.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We first discuss related work in Section 2. We then detail the
MUNO21 dataset in Section 3, and discuss our approach
for annotating the dataset, along with proposed evaluation metrics. In Section 4, we propose extensions of prior work that leverage new types of training data in MUNO21. Fi-nally, in Section 5, we compare state-of-the-art road extrac-tion methods and our proposed extensions on MUNO21. 2.