Abstract object (WSOD) detection
Weakly-supervised has emerged as an inspiring recent topic to avoid expensive instance-level object annotations. However, the bounding boxes of most existing WSOD methods are mainly deter-mined by precomputed proposals, thereby being limited in precise object localization.
In this paper, we defend the problem setting for improving localization performance by leveraging the bounding box regression knowledge from a well-annotated auxiliary dataset. First, we use the well-annotated auxiliary dataset to explore a series of learnable bounding box adjusters (LBBAs) in a multi-stage training manner, which is class-agnostic. Then, only LB-BAs and a weakly-annotated dataset with non-overlapped classes are used for training LBBA-boosted WSOD. As such, our LBBAs are practically more convenient and economical to implement while avoiding the leakage of the auxiliary well-annotated dataset.
In particular, we formulate learning bounding box adjusters as a bi-level optimization problem and suggest an EM-like multi-stage training algorithm. Then, a multi-stage scheme is further presented for LBBA-boosted WSOD. Additionally, a mask-ing strategy is adopted to improve proposal classification.
Experimental results verify the effectiveness of our method.
Our method performs favorably against state-of-the-art
WSOD methods and knowledge transfer model with similar problem setting. Code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/DongSky/lbba_boosted_wsod. 1.

Introduction
Object detection [8, 7, 19, 16] has attracted consider-able attention in computer vision community, and benefits a wide range of applications. Along with the development of powerful convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and large-scale well-annotated datasets, the performance of ob-ject detection networks has achieved remarkable improve-ment. Nevertheless, the success of object detection net-works highly depends on precise but costly instance-level bounding box annotations of abundant images. To allevi-ate this issue, weakly supervised object detection (WSOD) aiming at learning effective detection models with image-level supervision has emerged as an inspiring recent topic.
Existing WSOD methods [3, 25, 34, 20] usually adopt the multiple instance learning (MIL) framework based on the precomputed proposals. And most efforts have been given to improve proposal classification ability. However, the bounding boxes of most existing methods are mainly determined by precomputed proposals, thereby being lim-ited in precise object localization. For single-phase WSOD methods [3, 26, 25, 22, 13], the precomputed proposals clas-sified to a specific class are directly taken as the detec-tion results. Bounding box regression branches are intro-duced in [33, 20, 34] and multi-phase training are adopted in [36, 2]. But they are usually supervised based on the pseudo ground-truths by selecting precomputed proposals
In terms of localization perfor-with the highest scores. mance, there remains a huge gap between WSOD methods and their fully-supervised counterparts.
Transfer learning has also been investigated to improve the localization performance of WSOD. Lee et al. [12] pre-sented a universal bounding box regressor (UBBR) trained on a well-annotated auxiliary dataset for refining bound-ing boxes generated in WSOD. Instead, Uijlings et al. [28] trained a universal detector on the well-annotated source dataset, which is then transferred to WSOD as a generic pro-posal generator. However, [12] and [28] adopt the single-stage transfer strategy, which actually are not specified to
WSOD [3, 26, 12, 28] and suffer from imperfect annota-tions in source domain [17, 6, 28]. Going beyond [28],
Zhong et al. [37] trained and exploited the one-class uni-versal detector (OCUD) in a progressive manner. In con-trast, both the source well-annotated and target weakly an-notated datasets are required in the whole training process for OCUD [37]. When the source dataset is private and is of large scale [24, 18], it is preferred to avoid the direct joint use of the source and target datasets for WSOD with trans-fer learning. Instead, the owner of source datasets can first extract knowledge from data and then distribute knowledge instead of source datasets to the user for boosting WSOD.
In this paper, we follow the problem setting in [12, 28], and propose a learnable bounding box adjuster (LBBA) for boosting WSOD performance. Specifically, we consider a well-annotated auxiliary dataset and a weakly annotated dataset. Our method involves two subtasks, i.e., learning class-agnostic bounding box adjuster and training LBBA-boosted WSOD model. In comparison to [12, 28], the LB-BAs are specifically designed for improving WSOD per-formance by developing a multi-stage scheme. Different from [37], only the LBBAs and weakly-annotated dataset are used for boosting WSOD, and thus our approach is prac-tically convenient and economical for WSOD training while avoiding the leakage of the auxiliary dataset.
To better learn LBBAs from the well-annotated auxil-iary dataset and exploit them to improve the performance of WSOD, we formulate the learning of LBBAs as a bi-level optimization problem and present an EM-like multi-stage training algorithm. In particular, the lower subprob-lem is formulated to learn a deep detection model by incor-porating WSOD with LBBA-based regularization, while the upper subproblem is formulated to learn the boundary box adjuster for regressing the selected region proposals gener-ated by WSOD towards the ground-truth bounding boxes.
With such formulation, the LBBAs can thus be learned for optimizing WSOD performance. For solving the bi-level optimization problem, we adopt an EM-like multi-stage training algorithm by alternating between training LBBA and WSOD models. Given the class-agnostic and multi-stage LBBAs, the training of LBBA-boosted WSOD also involves several stages. In each stage, the final LBBA can be used to predict the bounding boxes based on the selected region proposals generated by WSOD, which are then used to train the WSOD models.
Nevertheless, our LBBAs improve localization perfor-mance but are limited in improving proposal classification.
As a remedy, we introduce a masking strategy to improve the classification performance of the detector. Specifically, a multi-label classifier is introduced to predict category con-fidence on image-level, which can further suppress scores of false-positive proposals of WSOD network.
Extensive experiments have been conducted to evaluate our proposed method. Benefiting from the class-agnostic setting, LBBAs generalize well to new classes of objects and improves the localization performance of WSOD. Our method performs favorably against state-of-the-art WSOD methods as well as knowledge transfer models with simi-lar problem setting, e.g., UBBR [12]. Contributions of this work can be summarized as follows: 1) Multi-stage learnable bounding box adjusters are pre-sented for improving localization performance of
WSOD, which is the core component of our proposed framework. Particularly, LBBAs make it feasible to use source and target datasets separately for training
WSOD models, which is practically more convenient and economical. 2) A bi-level optimization formulation, as well as an EM-like multi-stage training algorithm, are suggested to learn LBBAs specified for optimizing WSOD. 3) An effective masking strategy is introduced to improve the accuracy of the proposal classification branch. 4) Experimental results show our proposed method per-forms favorably against the state-of-the-art WSOD methods and knowledge transfer models with the sim-ilar problem setting. 2.