Abstract
Volumetric design is the ﬁrst and critical step for pro-fessional building design, where architects not only depict the rough 3D geometry of the building but also specify the programs to form a 2D layout on each ﬂoor. Though 2D layout generation for a single story has been widely studied, there is no developed method for multi-story buildings. This paper focuses on volumetric design generation conditioned on an input program graph. Instead of outputting dense 3D voxels, we propose a new 3D representation named voxel graph that is both compact and expressive for building ge-ometries. Our generator is a cross-modal graph neural network that uses a pointer mechanism to connect the in-put program graph and the output voxel graph, and the whole pipeline is trained using the adversarial framework.
The generated designs are evaluated qualitatively by a user study and quantitatively using three metrics: quality, diver-sity, and connectivity accuracy. We show that our model generates realistic 3D volumetric designs and outperforms previous methods and baselines. 1.

Introduction
Volumetric design (also called massing design or schematic design) is the ﬁrst step when an architect designs a building on a given land site. Based on the local building codes applied to the site, the building can only be designed within a valid design space, which is usually not a regular cuboid. For instance, the daylight restrictions prevent the building from casting too much shadow over its neighboring building by drawing a slant line as upper bound. Within the valid design space, a volumetric design not only depicts the volumetric 3D shape of the building, but also produces 2D program layouts for each story. An example is illustrated in
Figure 2. The architect then uses the ﬁnalized volumetric design to gradually develop all the details for construction, including fac¸ade design, interior design, structure systems, etc. While volumetric design is the foundation of the design
*Contributed equally. chin-yi.cheng@autodesk.com
Figure 1. Our model takes in a program graph (also called bubble diagram) and a design space in voxel graph representation, and outputs a variety of volumetric designs. Professional architects can convert the output into detailed building design efﬁciently. and construction process, making a good volumetric design usually requires a signiﬁcant amount of time and effort. An efﬁcient pipeline to generate volumetric design will bring a great impact on the architecture and construction industry.
Generating realistic 2D room layouts has been a pop-ular topic for many years.
Existing methods include optimization-based [15, 1] and learning-based [30, 18, 12, 5] approaches. Recently, researchers start looking at how to integrate program graphs into layout generation tasks using graph neural networks (GNNs) [18, 12, 5]. Program graph, also called bubble diagram, is a graph that illustrates the relations between programs or rooms and is a common rep-resentation used by professional architects to explore design ideas. Similar to House-GAN [18], this paper also focuses on the graph-conditioned layout generation task. The task
We also work with professional architects to create a synthetic dataset that contains 120,000 volumetric designs based on realistic building requirements. We evaluate our model qualitatively and quantitatively, and it outperforms existing method by a large margin in all the three metrics: quality, diversity, and connectivity accuracy.
In summary, our main contributions are: 1) a new 3D representation, voxel graph; 2) a graph-conditioned gener-ative adversarial network (GAN) using GNN and pointer-based cross-modal module; 3) an automated pipeline to gen-erate valid volumetric designs through simple interaction; and 4) a synthetic dataset that contains 120,000 volumetric design and their corresponding program graphs. We will share the code, model, and dataset. 2.