Abstract
For high spatial resolution (HSR) remote sensing im-ages, bitemporal supervised learning always dominates change detection using many pairwise labeled bitemporal images. However, it is very expensive and time-consuming to pairwise label large-scale bitemporal HSR remote sens-ing images. In this paper, we propose single-temporal su-pervised learning (STAR) for change detection from a new perspective of exploiting object changes in unpaired im-ages as supervisory signals.
STAR enables us to train a high-accuracy change detector only using unpaired la-beled images and generalize to real-world bitemporal im-ages. To evaluate the effectiveness of STAR, we design a simple yet effective change detector called ChangeStar, which can reuse any deep semantic segmentation architec-ture by the ChangeMixin module. The comprehensive ex-perimental results show that ChangeStar outperforms the baseline with a large margin under single-temporal super-vision and achieves superior performance under bitempo-ral supervision. Code is available at https://github. com/Z-Zheng/ChangeStar. 1.

Introduction
Object change detection using multi-temporal high spa-tial resolution (HSR) remote sensing imagery is a mean-ingful but challenging fundamental task in remote sensing and earth vision, which can provide more accurate object change information of land surface for urban expansion, ur-ban planning, environmental monitoring, and disaster as-sessment [14, 28, 8, 19, 11]. This task takes bitemporal images as input and outputs pixel-wise object change.
The dominating change detection methods are based on deep convolutional neural networks (ConvNet) toward high-accuracy and reliable geospatial object change detection in complex application scenarios. Learning a ConvNet change detector needs a large number of pairwise labeled bitempo-ral images with bitemporal supervision, as shown in Fig. 1 (a) Conventional Bitemporal Supervised Learning (b) STAR: Single-Temporal supervised leARning
Figure 1: Comparison of conventional bitemporal super-vised learning and the proposed single-temporal supervised learning for object change detection. By exploiting object changes in arbitrary image pairs as the supervisory signals,
STAR makes it possible to learn a change detector from un-paired single-temporal images. (a). However, pairwise labeling large-scale and high-quality bitemporal HSR remote sensing images is very expensive and time-consuming because of the extensive coverage of remote sensing images. This signiﬁcantly limits the real-world applications of the change detection technique.
We observed that the importance of pairwise labeled bitemporal images lies in that the change detector needs paired semantic information to deﬁne positive and nega-tive samples for object change detection. These positive and negative samples are usually determined by whether the pixels at two different times have different semantics in the same geographical area. The semantics of bitemporal pixels controls the label assignment, while the positional consis-tency condition1 is only used to guarantee independent and
∗corresponding author. 1The bitemporal pixels should be at the same geographical position.
identically distributed (i.i.d.) training and inference. It is conceivable that change is everywhere, especially between unpaired images, if we relax the positional consistency con-dition to deﬁne positive and negative samples.
In this paper, we propose a single-temporal supervised object change detection approach to bypass the problem of collecting paired labeled images by exploiting object change between unpaired images as supervisory signals, as shown in Fig. 1 (b). This approach enables us to train a high-accuracy change detector using unpaired labeled im-ages and generalize to real-world bitemporal images at the inference stage. Because it only needs single-temporal se-mantic segmentation labels to construct object changes as change detection labels, we refer to our approach as Single-Temporal supervised leARning (STAR).
Conditioned by the same geographical area, bitempo-ral supervised learning can avoid many out-of-distribution positive samples, whereas this is both an opportunity and a challenge for the STAR. These out-of-distribution samples make the change detector driven by STAR more potential to possess better generalization. Meanwhile, they also cause the overﬁtting problem to make the model learn biased rep-resentation. To alleviate this problem, we explore an induc-tive bias: temporal symmetry and leverage it to constraint the representation learning for the change detector.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of STAR algorithm, we design a simple yet uniﬁed change detector called ChangeS-tar, which follows the modular design and is made up of an arbitrary deep semantic segmentation model and the
ChangeMixin module driven by STAR. The ChangeMixin module is designed to enable an arbitrary deep semantic segmentation model to detect object change. This allows
ChangeStar to reuse excellent semantic segmentation archi-tectures to assist in change detection without extra speciﬁc architecture design, which bridges the gap between seman-tic segmentation and change detection.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
• To fundamentally alleviate the problem of collecting paired labeled images, we proposed single-temporal supervised learning (STAR) to enable object change detectors to learn from unpaired labeled images.
• To further stabilize the learning, we explore and lever-age an inductive bias, temporal symmetry, to alleviate the overﬁtting problem caused by the absence of posi-tional consistency condition in unpaired images.
• To reuse the modern semantic segmentation architec-tures, we proposed a simple yet effective multi-task ar-chitecture, called ChangeStar, for joint semantic seg-mentation and change detection. The core component of ChangeStar is the ChangeMixin, which enables off-the-shelf segmentation model to detect object change. 2.