Abstract
Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) have been widely used and achieved remarkable results in skeleton-based
In GCNs, graph topology dominates action recognition. feature aggregation and therefore is the key to extract-ing representative features.
In this work, we propose a novel Channel-wise Topology Refinement Graph Convolu-tion (CTR-GC) to dynamically learn different topologies and effectively aggregate joint features in different chan-nels for skeleton-based action recognition. The proposed
CTR-GC models channel-wise topologies through learning a shared topology as a generic prior for all channels and re-fining it with channel-specific correlations for each channel.
Our refinement method introduces few extra parameters and significantly reduces the difficulty of modeling channel-wise topologies. Furthermore, via reformulating graph convo-lutions into a unified form, we find that CTR-GC relaxes strict constraints of graph convolutions, leading to stronger representation capability. Combining CTR-GC with tempo-ral modeling modules, we develop a powerful graph convo-lutional network named CTR-GCN which notably outper-forms state-of-the-art methods on the NTU RGB+D, NTU
RGB+D 120, and NW-UCLA datasets.1 1.

Introduction
Human action recognition is an important task with var-ious applications ranging from human-robot interaction to video surveillance. In recent years, skeleton-based human action recognition has attracted much attention due to the development of depth sensors and its robustness against complicated backgrounds.
*Corresponding author. 1https://github.com/Uason-Chen/CTR-GCN.
Figure 1. Channel-wise topology refinement. Lines of different colors correspond to topologies in different channels and the thick-ness of lines indicates the correlation strength between joints.
Early deep-learning-based methods treat human joints as a set of independent features and organize them into a fea-ture sequence or a pseudo-image, which is fed into RNNs or CNNs to predict action labels. However, these meth-ods overlook inherent correlations between joints, which reveals human body topology and is important information of human skeleton. Yan et al. [32] firstly modeled correla-tions between human joints with graphs and apply GCNs along with temporal convolutions to extract motion fea-tures. While the manually defined topology they employ is difficult to achieve relationship modeling between unnatu-rally connected joints and limits representation capability of
GCNs. In order to boost power of GCNs, recent approaches
[24, 35, 34] adaptively learn the topology of human skeleton through attention or other mechanisms. They use a topology for all channels, which forces GCNs to aggregate features with the same topology in different channels and thus limits the flexibility of feature extraction. Since different channels represent different types of motion features and correlations between joints under different motion features are not al-ways the same, it’s not optimal to use one shared topology.
Cheng et al. [3] set individual parameterized topologies for channel groups. However, the topologies of different groups
are learned independently and the model becomes too heavy when setting channel-wise parameterized topologies, which increases the difficulty of optimization and hinders effective modeling of channel-wise topologies. Moreover, parame-terized topologies remain the same for all samples, which is unable to model sample-dependent correlations.
In this paper, we propose a channel-wise topology refine-ment graph convolution which models channel-wise topol-ogy dynamically and effectively. Instead of learning topolo-gies of different channels independently, CTR-GC learns channel-wise topologies in a refinement way. Specifically,
CTR-GC learns a shared topology and channel-specific cor-relations simultaneously. The shared topology is a param-eterized adjacency matrix that serves as topological priors for all channels and provides generic correlations between vertices. The channel-specific correlations are dynamically inferred for each sample and they capture subtle relation-ships between vertices within each channel. By refining the shared topology with channel-specific correlations, CTR-GC obtains channel-wise topologies (illustrated in Figure 1). Our refinement method avoids modeling the topology of each channel independently and introduces few extra pa-rameters, which significantly reduces the difficulty of mod-eling channel-wise topologies. Moreover, through reformu-lating four categories of graph convolutions into a unified form, we verify the proposed CTR-GC essentially relaxes strict constraints of other categories of graph convolutions and improves the representation capability.
Combining CTR-GC with temporal modeling mod-ules, we construct a powerful graph convolutional net-work named CTR-GCN for skeleton-based action recog-nition. Extensive experimental results on NTU RGB+D,
NTU RGB+D 120, and NW-UCLA show that (1) our CTR-GC significantly outperforms other graph convolutions pro-posed for skeleton-based action recognition with compa-rable parameters and computation cost; (2) Our CTR-GCN exceeds state-of-the-art methods notably on all three datasets.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose a channel-wise topology refinement graph convolution which dynamically models channel-wise topologies in a refinement approach, leading to flexible and effective correlation modeling.
• We mathematically unify the form of existing graph convolutions in skeleton-based action recognition and find that CTR-GC relaxes constraints of other graph convolutions, providing more powerful graph model-ing capability.
• The extensive experimental results highlight the ben-efits of channel-wise topology and the refinement method. The proposed CTR-GCN outperforms state-of-the-art methods significantly on three skeleton-based action recognition benchmarks. 2.