Abstract
Automatic polyp segmentation from colonoscopy images is an essential step in computer aided diagnosis for colorec-tal cancer. Most of polyp segmentation methods reported in recent years are based on fully supervised deep learn-ing. However, annotation for polyp images by physicians during the diagnosis is time-consuming and costly. In this paper, we present a novel semi-supervised polyp segmenta-tion via collaborative and adversarial learning of focused and dispersive representations learning model, where fo-cused and dispersive extraction module are used to deal with the diversity of location and shape of polyps. In ad-dition, confidence maps produced by a discriminator in an adversarial training framework shows the effectiveness of leveraging unlabeled data and improving the performance of segmentation network. Consistent regularization is fur-ther employed to optimize the segmentation networks to strengthen the representation of the outputs of focused and dispersive extraction module. We also propose an aux-iliary adversarial learning method to better leverage un-labeled examples to further improve semantic segmenta-tion accuracy. We conduct extensive experiments on two famous polyp datasets: Kvasir-SEG and CVC-Clinic DB.
Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed model, consistently outperforming state-of-the-art semi-supervised segmentation models based on adversarial training and even some advanced fully supervised models. 1.

Introduction
Automatic segmentation of polyp plays a key role in computer-aided diagnosis for Colorectal cancer (CRC), which is one of the most common type of cancer around the world [26]. As for polyps, colonoscopy is an significant detection way, which can help in the removal of the polyps and greatly prevent them from developing into the CRC.
Recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have exhibited excellent performance in the image segmen-tation tasks. Semantic segmentation aims to assign each pixel of an image with a label so that the pixels with the same label can be used to infer the target of wanted. For semantic segmentation tasks, most approaches based on deep learning methods can be utilized in different medical tasks [6, 29, 33, 34, 36] like segmentation of blood ves-sel, skin lesion, lung nodule, and cell nuclei. Compared to manual segmentation by physicians during the diagno-sis, which is time-consuming and subjective, medical au-tomatic segmentation has great advantages and huge po-tential in computer-aided diagnosis (CAD). However, lack-ing of a large number of pixel-wise annotations for train-ing is a great challenge for automatic medical segmentation task. Annotating medical data such as polyps, which vary in shape, texture and appearance location, always needs a lot of time and effort, results in a challenging task for polyp segmentation.
Commonly in some medical image segmentation tasks, allocating each pixel with a correct label in blurred im-ages is very hard. However, obtaining the global informa-tion of blurred images can effectively resolve the problem about distinguishing target and background in a segmenta-tion task. For this purpose, the non-local network [31] is proposed to model the long-range dependencies using self-attention mechanism [28]. Furthermore, Cao et al. [3] pro-posed a new instantiation of the general network, called global context (GC) block by a combination of the opti-mal implementation of non-local (NL) block and squeeze-and-excitation (SE) block [11] at each step.
In addition, convolutional block attention module (CBAM) provides a simple yet effective attention mechanism for feed-forward
CNNs [32]. But these methods for distinguishing target and background is in view of paired medical images and its ground truth images.
In recent years, different kinds of semi-supervised method are proposed for dealing with the shortage of la-beled data. Hung et al. [13] adopted adversarial learning by using a segmentation network and a discriminator net-work to produce the confidence map based on the segmen-tation predictions of unlabeled images as supervisory sig-nals to train the segmentation network. Another adversar-ial training method can be found in [22] by using a virtual adversarial regularization. Besides, the methods of consis-tency are widely used in semi-supervised training for both classification task and segmentation task [15, 24, 27]. The augmentation methods of perturbations on images have also proven their effectiveness for evaluating semi-supervised regularizers[9].
In this paper, considering the characteristics of polyp and the limited of pixel-wise annotations, we propose a novel semi-supervised polyp segmentation method, which uses collaborative segmentation networks with two different fea-ture extraction modules to capture the location and edge in-formation of polyp and uses an adversarial learning method similar to [13] and another method for auxiliary adversarial learning to fine tune the segmentation networks with unla-beled images. We perform extensive experiments to evalu-ate our method on the Kvasir dataset [14] and CVC-Clinic
DB [2] that the experiments results show the effectiveness of our method.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel semi-supervised method for polyp segmentation, named collaborative and adversarial learning of focused and dispersive representations learning model. We propose two extraction modules,
FEM and DEM, in the encoding path of two segmen-tation networks respectively. FEM allows our network to capture the focused information of the input feature maps like location information and spatial information, while DEM attempts to aggregate the scattered bound-ary information of the inputs.
• We simultaneously train two segmentation networks and a discriminator network with labeled images through an adversarial training method. With the help of consistency constraint, we can take the advantage of the two feature maps of FEM and DEM to produce confidence maps by the trained discriminator network with high credibility. The confidence maps generated based on unlabeled images in semi-supervised training stage can be used as supervised signals to fine-tune the segmentation networks.
• Another adversarial training method, named auxiliary adversarial learning (AAL), is proposed to improve the quality of segmentation predictions from unlabeled images in the semi-supervised training stage. We adopt a new discriminator to assign the true label for the seg-mentation results of labeled images and fake label for the prediction of unlabeled images. With AAL, we can obtain confidence maps with higher credibility which can be better utilized for the segmentation networks. 2.