Abstract
Unsupervised representation learning has achieved out-standing performances using centralized data available on the Internet. However, the increasing awareness of privacy protection limits sharing of decentralized unlabeled image data that grows explosively in multiple parties (e.g., mo-bile phones and cameras). As such, a natural problem is how to leverage these data to learn visual representations for downstream tasks while preserving data privacy. To ad-dress this problem, we propose a novel federated unsuper-vised learning framework, FedU. In this framework, each party trains models from unlabeled data independently us-ing contrastive learning with an online network and a target network. Then, a central server aggregates trained models and updates clients’ models with the aggregated model. It preserves data privacy as each party only has access to its raw data. Decentralized data among multiple parties are normally non-independent and identically distributed (non-IID), leading to performance degradation. To tackle this challenge, we propose two simple but effective methods: 1)
We design the communication protocol to upload only the encoders of online networks for server aggregation and up-date them with the aggregated encoder; 2) We introduce a new module to dynamically decide how to update predictors based on the divergence caused by non-IID. The predictor is the other component of the online network. Extensive ex-periments and ablations demonstrate the effectiveness and significance of FedU. It outperforms training with only one party by over 5% and other methods by over 14% in linear and semi-supervised evaluation on non-IID data. 1.

Introduction
Learning good visual representations without supervi-sion is attracting considerable attention in recent years.
These visual representations can facilitate efficient train-ing of downstream tasks [29, 24] like image segmenta-tion [19]. Researchers have proposed many unsupervised representation learning methods by designing pretext tasks
[5, 37, 22, 6]. Among them, contrastive learning [9, 23] based on instance-level discrimination has achieved the state-of-the-art performance [33, 1, 10, 8, 2]. These un-supervised representation learning methods rely on the as-sumption that data can be collected and stored in a central-ized database, such as images from the Internet.
However, in real-world scenarios, decentralized image data are growing explosively and the data collected in mul-tiple parties may not be centralized due to data privacy reg-ulations [3]. For example, photos taken on phones or im-ages collected from street cameras could contain sensitive information. Centralizing them for training could reveal the identity and locality of individuals [42]. Besides, compared with training representations using only publicly available data from the Internet, representations learned from the ac-tual data may be more representative for downstream tasks applied on similar scenarios. Utilizing the decentralized unlabeled image data to learn representations with privacy guaranteed is an important but overlooked problem.
Existing methods cannot leverage decentralized unla-beled data to learn a generic representation while preserving data privacy. Federated learning is an emerging distributed training technique [21] that have empowered multiple par-ties to collaboratively learn computer vision models, such as segmentation [18, 28], object detection [20], and per-son re-identification [42]. But traditional federated learning relies on data labels. Decentralized data is normally non-independent and identically distributed (non-IID), which is one of the key challenges for learning from multiple parties
[38, 16]. For example, in real-world street datasets [20], cameras capture diverse two or three out of seven object categories. The state-of-the-art unsupervised learning ap-proaches are effective, but they may not work well with non-IID data, as shown in Figure 1(a). Although Feder-ated Contrastive Averaging (FedCA) [36] addresses the un-labeled and non-IID problems, it imposes potential privacy leakage risks by directly sharing features of clients’ data.
In this paper, we propose a new federated unsupervised representation learning framework, FedU, to learn generic
leveraging unla-important but overlooked problem: beled data from multiple parties to learn visual rep-resentations while preserving data privacy.
• We design the communication protocol to only aggre-gate and update the online encoders by analyzing the impact of non-IID data on Siamese networks.
• We propose a new module, divergence-aware predic-tor update (DAPU), to dynamically determine how to update predictors based on the degree of divergence caused by non-IID data.
• Extensive experiments and ablations demonstrate the effectiveness and significance of FedU. 2.