Abstract
Black-box attacks aim to generate adversarial noise to fail the victim deep neural network in the black box. The central task in black-box attack method design is to estimate and characterize the victim model in the high-dimensional model space based on feedback results of queries submitted to the victim network. The central performance goal is to minimize the number of queries needed for successful at-tack. Existing attack methods directly search and refine the adversarial noise in an extremely high-dimensional space, requiring hundreds or even thousands queries to the victim network. To address this challenge, we propose to explore a consistency and sensitivity guided ensemble attack (CSEA) method in a low-dimensional space. Specifically, we esti-mate the victim model in the black box using a learned lin-ear composition of an ensemble of surrogate models with diversified network structures. Using random block masks on the input image, these surrogate models jointly construct and submit randomized and sparsified queries to the victim model. Based on these query results and guided by a con-sistency constraint, the surrogate models can be trained us-ing a very small number of queries such that their learned composition is able to accurately approximate the victim model in the high-dimensional space. The randomized and sparsified queries also provide important information for us to construct an attack sensitivity map for the input image, with which the adversarial attack can be locally refined to further increase its success rate. Our extensive experimen-tal results demonstrate that our proposed approach signifi-cantly reduces the number of queries to the victim network while maintaining very high success rates, outperforming existing black-box attack methods by large margins. 1.

Introduction
Deep neural networks are sensitive to adversarial attacks
[26, 2]. A very small amount of adversarial noise added to the input image can successfully fool the state-of-art clas-Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed idea for consistency-sensitivity guided ensemble attack in a low-dimensional space. sifier with a very high probability. There are two types of adversarial attacks, white-box attacks which have full ac-cess to the victim network under attack and black-box at-tacks which have no knowledge about the network. In this work, we focus on black-box attacks which remain an open and very challenging problem. In black-box attacks, it is assumed that the attacker can only query the victim net-work and obtain its output score for a given input image
[19]. There are two major performance metrics, the num-ber of queries to the victim network and the attack success rate, used to evaluate the performance of black-box attacks
[9]. In black box attack research, the objective is to mini-mize the number of queries submitted to the victim network while achieving a very high attack success rate.
Two major approaches have been explored in the liter-ature for black-box attacks. The first one is the transfer-based approach which uses a trained surrogate network to generate attacks based on the white-box approach, hoping this attack noise can be effectively transferred to the un-known target network [7, 12]. This approach often suffers from low success rates since the adversarial attack is a very sophisticated error accumulation process depending on the specific parameter settings of victim model and the input image. The second one is the query-based approach which queries the target network continuously, searches or modi-fies the attack noise based on the query score feedback us-ing gradient descent or other optimization methods [19, 21].
This approach often needs a larger number of queries since both the victim model and the input image have extremely high dimensions and the gradient-based searches and attack noise optimization in such high-dimensional spaces involve a very large number of search steps and queries. Currently, the average number of queries achieved by existing state-of-the-art methods remains very high, often in the range of
In practice, it is a few hundreds or even thousands [19]. prohibitive or unrealistic to query the victim network to be attacked for a large number of times. For example, if an on-line face recognition service detects that a large number of queries have been issued from the same source, it can sim-ply activate its defense mechanism and disable its access for security protection reasons. Therefore, it is highly desirable to significantly reduce the number of queries for black-box attacks while maintaining a very high success rate, which is the central goal of this work.
In both targeted and untargeted attacks, the attack is suc-cessful if the output score of the victim network for the at-tacked image is significantly deviated from the correct score of the original image [13, 19]. Therefore, the attack success rate depends on how well the victim model is approximated and how effectively the detailed network responses of the input image are characterized and exploited. The central challenge in black-box attacks is the high dimensionality
[13]. It is well known that the search complexity typically increases exponentially with the number of dimensions. In black box attacks, the adversarial noise has the same di-mension as the input image size, which is very large. In the meantime, the surrogate model aims to approximate the vic-tim model in the black box which has an unknown network structure with millions of model parameters.
To address this challenge, we propose a consistency-sensitivity guided ensemble attack (CSEA) method for highly efficient search and estimate the victim model in the high-dimensional model space. The central idea is illus-trated in Figure 1. To prevent the search process from being trapped in local minimums, we construct an ensemble of surrogate models with diversified structures which perform collaborative search in the high-dimensional model space.
We then estimate or approximate the victim model using a learned linear composition of these surrogate models. Us-ing random block masks on the input image, these surro-gate models jointly construct and submit randomized and sparsified queries to the victim model. Based on the feed-back results of these highly diversified queries, the surro-gate models are able to effectively learn and evolve them-selves in the model space. Guided by a consistency con-straint, their learned composition is able to approximate the victim network very efficiently using a very small number of queries. Furthermore, the block-wise randomized and sparsified queries provide important information for us to estimate the attack sensitivity map for the input image. Us-ing this sensitivity map, we can perform block-based local refinement of the attack to further increase its success rate.
Our experimental results will demonstrate that this CSEA approach is able to significantly reduce (by up to 50%) the number of needed queries to the victim network to achieve successful attacks, when compared to the state-of-the-art black-box attack methods. 2.