Abstract
Shape analysis has been playing an important role in early diagnosis and prognosis of neurodegenerative dis-eases such as Alzheimer’s diseases (AD). However, ob-taining effective shape representations remains challeng-ing. This paper proposes to use the Alexandrov polyhedra as surface-based shape signatures for cortical morphome-try analysis. Given a closed genus-0 surface, its Alexan-drov polyhedron is a convex representation that encodes its intrinsic geometry information. We propose to com-pute the polyhedra via a novel spherical optimal trans-In our experiments, we observe port (OT) computation. that the Alexandrov polyhedra of cortical surfaces between pathology-conﬁrmed AD and cognitively unimpaired indi-viduals are signiﬁcantly different. Moreover, we propose a visualization method by comparing local geometry differ-ences across cortical surfaces. We show that the proposed method is effective in pinpointing regional cortical struc-tural changes impacted by AD. 1.

Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common type of dementia. It is commonly agreed that an effective presymp-tomatic diagnosis and treatment of AD could have enor-mous public health beneﬁts [15]. Brain structural mag-netic resonance imaging (sMRI) research has the potential to provide valid diagnostic biomarkers of AD risk factors.
Although brain structural volumes are the most commonly used sMRI measures in AD research, surface-based brain structural measures offer more detailed and patient-speciﬁc shape information [21, 14, 2, 25]. Overall, a geometrically
*These two authors have equal contribution.
†Corresponding author
Figure 1: The Minkowski Problem solid method, which is sensitive to intrinsic surface geomet-ric features, is vital to identify reliable imaging biomarkers, reduce the sheer number of statistical tests, and thereby im-prove the statistical power of imaging analysis.
It is well known that a general surface in R3 is fully de-termined by its ﬁrst fundamental form (Riemannian met-ric) and the second fundamental form, unique up to a rigid motion. Closed convex surfaces are solely determined by their Riemann metrics. According to Gauss’s Theorema
Egregium, the Gaussian curvature is intrinsically deter-mined by the Riemannian metric. Therefore, given a sur-face, it is natural to ask whether its Gaussian curvature could be encoded into a convex shape, which enables us to visualize the Riemannian metric of the input surface, and helps us compare the Riemannian metric of the given sur-face to other surfaces.
The existence and computation of such a convex shape representation relates to the Minkowski problem and the
Minkowski theorem. Mathematically, the Minkowski prob-lem (type II) asks how to reconstruct a convex shape that fulﬁls a given Gaussian curvature measure. As shown in
Fig. 1, the setup for the Minkowski problem is as follows:
R3 is convex and contains the origin O. The
A domain K boundary ∂K is a smooth convex surface, with polar coor-∈
R+
S2, ρ : S2
| x
∈
H
∂K, x
ρ(x)x
{ 2, then GK pulls back and dinate representation
}
→ the corresponding polar map P : S2
ρ(x)x.
→ (cid:55)→
S2 maps each point
The normal mapping NK := ∂K
→ on ∂K to its normal vector. Now, the composition map
P is a mapping from S2 to S2. If we denote the
GK := NK ◦
Hausdorff measure (i.e., area element) on the image domain 2 to the domain S2 and
S2 as
H 2 is called the Gaussian the pulled-back measure (GK)#H curvature measure, denoted as ν. The Minkowski prob-lem asks how to ﬁnd the shape of ∂K from the Gaussian curvature measure ν.
In fact, GK is the unique optimal 2 and ν, and therefore, transportation (OT) map between the Minkowski problem is equivalent to solving a spheri-cal OT problem, i.e., ﬁnding the most economical way on 2 to the sphere surface to transport the source measure the target measure ν under a prescribed cost function. For the Minkowski problem, the transportation cost is related to the spherical geodesic distance. According to Monge-Kantorovich theory, this is reduced to ﬁnding a pair of con-vex potential functions, which are Legendre dual to each other. Furthermore, the Kantorovic potential satisﬁes the spherical Monge-Amp`ere PDE. In discrete cases where the input surface is represented as a triangle mesh, the classical smooth solution can be approximated by weak solutions, i.e., the Alexandrov solutions, which are convex polyhedra and C 1 converges to the smooth solution.
H
H
In this work, we prove the existence of the solution to the
Minkowski problem based on Monge-Kantorovich theory (see e.g., [23]). The proof leads to a rigorous and practical algorithm to compute the Alexandrov polyhedron using a variational approach in the discrete case. Furthermore, the obtained Alexandrov polyhedron can be applied as a shape signature of the original surface. Our experiments show that the Hausdorff distances between Alexandrov polyhedra of the brain cortical surfaces from AD patients and cogni-tively unimpaired (CU) individuals have signiﬁcant group differences. Also, by comparing the shapes of Alexandrov polyhedra, we can pinpoint the AD-impacted brain regions that have signiﬁcant geometric changes. These results show that the Alexandrov polyhedra are effective and accurate as shape signatures in capturing and visualizing geomet-ric structural changes of brain cortical surfaces affected by early AD. Moreover, we base the computation of Alexan-drov polyhedra on computing intrinsic spherical optimal transport maps, where novel mathematical formula and al-gorithms are used to improve efﬁciency.