Abstract
Modeling the hand-object (HO) interaction not only re-quires estimation of the HO pose, but also pays attention to the contact due to their interaction. Significant progress has been made in estimating hand and object separately with deep learning methods, simultaneous HO pose estimation and contact modeling has not yet been fully explored. In this paper, we present an explicit contact representation namely
Contact Potential Field (CPF), and a learning-fitting hy-brid framework namely MIHO to Modeling the Interaction of Hand and Object. In CPF, we treat each contacting HO vertex pair as a spring-mass system. Hence the whole sys-tem forms a potential field with minimal elastic energy at the grasp position. Extensive experiments on the two com-monly used benchmarks have demonstrated that our method can achieve state-of-the-art in several reconstruction met-rics, and allow us to produce more physically plausible
HO pose even when the ground-truth exhibits severe in-terpenetration or disjointedness. Our code is available at https://github.com/lixiny/CPF. 1.

Introduction
It is essential to model hand-object interaction from a single image for understanding the human activities, in which simulating a physically plausible grasp is also cru-cial for VR/AR, teleoperation, and grasping applications.
Given an image as input, the problem aims to not only es-timate proper hand-object pose but also to recover a natu-ral grasp configuration. While estimating hand [36, 31, 58, 4, 19, 56] or object [20, 23, 14, 54, 55] alone has made a considerable success over the past decades, simultaneously estimating hand-object pose [24, 51, 23, 28, 12] with inter-action has only emerged in the past few years.
Previous works on joint hand-object estimation usually treat the contact as a result of the correct pose estimation
[23, 29, 44]. Apparently, if the hand and object can be perfectly recovered, the contact between them will also be
†Cewu Lu is the corresponding author. He is the member of Qing Yuan
Research Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China.
Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed Contact Potential Field.
The contacts between hand and object vertices are modeled as the attractive (right) and repulsive (left) springs that connect paired vertex on them. satisfied. Yet, such perfection cannot be achieved in prac-tice. Since contact can provide rich cues to guide accurate pose and natural grasp, more attention has been recently drawn to the contact modeling [5, 7] and contact repre-sentation [26, 6]. And several contact datasets [5, 7, 50] have been released to the community. However, a solu-tion of properly integrating contact modeling into the cur-rent hand-object pose estimation pipeline has remained an open research question. The existing methods either exploit distance-based attraction and repulsion [24, 26] to mitigate disjointedness and interpenetration, or refine the predicted pose in virtue of physics simulators [28, 29, 17]. While the both solutions are considered to be irrelevant to contact se-mantics, which we will explain later, the latter solutions also lack flexibility on hand pose and shape.
To model the contact, we propose an explicit represen-tation named Contact Potential Field (CPF, §4). It is built upon the idea that the contact between a hand and an ob-ject mesh under grasp configuration is multi-point contact, which involves multiple hand-object vertex pair affinities.
These affinities are regarded as the contact semantics, which depict the pairing of the hand-object vertices that come into contact with each other during the interaction. When noisy predicted hand and object are disjointed from each other, we shall apply an attraction to pull these vertex pairs close;
While the hand and object are intersected, we shall have a
repulsion to push them away. Contacts of those affinitive vertex pairs are the result of equilibrium between the at-traction and repulsion. In this paper, we treat each contact-ing HO vertex pair as a spring-mass system. First, the two end-points of spring is a counterpart of the two HO vertices in affinity. Second, the spring’s elastic property is another counterpart of the intensity of the vertex pair affinity. In this way, we can model the HO interaction with a potential field, as we call it CPF, which is determined by minimal elastic energy at the grasp position. Therefore, estimating the HO pose under contact is equivalent to minimizing the elastic energy inside CPF. Representing contact as CPF has two main advantages. First, compared with contact heuristic with proximity metrics [1, 52] or distance field [26, 6], CPF is able to assign per-vertex contact semantics (contact points on different hand part) to object mesh. Second, by mini-mizing the elastic energy, CPF can uniformly avoid inter-penetration and control the disjointedness. Based on CPF, we also propose a novel learning-fitting hybrid framework namely for Modeling the Interaction of Hand and Object, as we call it MIHO (§5).
Another problem with the existing methods is the rep-resentation of the hand model. Most researches adopted a skinning model, MANO [47], to represent hand. MANO is considered to be flexible and deformable with its pose and shape parameters. However, fitting on these high DoFs pa-rameters is prone to anatomical abnormality. Researches in the robotics community adopted a dexterous hand [29, 17] in the off-the-shelf grasping software [35], which can al-most guarantee a valid pose. But the rigidity of those rod-like hand is less suitable for applications in CV/CG. To make the best of both worlds, we propose a novel anatomi-cally constrained hand model namely A-MANO (§3). It in-herits the formulation of the skinning model and constrains the hand joints’ rotation within a proposed twist-splay-bend frame (Fig. 2).
For evaluation, we report our scores on FHB [18] and
HO3D [22, 21] dataset in terms of reconstruction and phys-ical quality metrics. Note that, the ground truth of FHB is noisy and suffers from severe interpenetration [26]. Since our method can avoid the penetration in the first place, our results are more visually and physically plausible. There-fore, we argue that, in this dataset, a higher reconstruction score does not necessarily benchmark the performance of the method. While on HO3D, we achieve state-of-the-art performance on both reconstruction and physical metrics.
The contributions of this paper are as follows.
• We highlight contact in the hand-object interaction modeling task by proposing an explicit representation named CPF.
• We introduce A-MANO, anatomical-constrained hand model that helps to mitigate pose’s abnormality during optimization. a novel
• We present a novel framework, MIHO, for modeling hand-object interaction. It can achieve state-of-the-art performance on several benchmarks. 2.