Abstract
Object detection aims to accurately locate and classify objects in an image, which requires precise object represen-tations. Existing methods usually use rectangular anchor boxes or a set of points to represent objects. However, these methods either introduce background noise or miss the con-tinuous appearance information inside the object, and thus cause incorrect detection results. In this paper, we propose a novel anchor-free object detection network, called Cross-Det, which uses a set of growing cross lines along horizon-tal and vertical axes as object representations. An object can be flexibly represented as cross lines in different com-binations. It not only can effectively reduce the interference of noise, but also take into account the continuous object information, which is useful to enhance the discriminabil-ity of object features and find the object boundaries. Based on the learned cross lines, we propose a crossline extrac-tion module to adaptively capture features of cross lines.
Furthermore, we design a decoupled regression mechanism to regress the localization along the horizontal and verti-cal directions respectively, which helps to decrease the op-timization difficulty because the optimization space is lim-ited to a specific direction. Our method achieves consis-tently improvement on the PASCAL VOC and MS-COCO datasets. The experiment results demonstrate the effective-ness of our proposed method. Code can be available at: https://github.com/QiuHeqian/CrossDet. 1.

Introduction
Object detection usually relies on object representation to predict the location and category of objects in an im-age. Thus, a suitable object representation is key to the success of object detection. Existing popular object de-tectors mainly base on two classes of object representa-tions: anchor-based representation and point-based repre-∗Corresponding authors.
Figure 1. Different object representations for object detection. (a) uses rectangular anchor boxes as object representation [12]. (b) and (c) use single center point [27] and a set of keypoints [30] as object representation. The red/green boxes are assembled by the red/green dots. (d) denotes our crossline representation by yellow lines. Green boxes indicate the correct predict. Red boxes indicate false predictions. sentation.
Anchor-based representation methods [1, 3, 8, 13, 15, 18, 21, 23, 26] usually place a set of bounding boxes with pre-defined size anchors as their basic object representations, and then regress and classify them based on extracted fea-tures by one or several times. However, to ensure a good recall rate, these methods require to manually design the hyper-parameters of anchors for new scenarios with differ-ent object sizes or aspect ratios. In addition, these meth-ods [1, 3, 8, 23, 26] often extract the whole features inside anchor. When there are two objects overlapped, it is easy to be confused because both of them contain the similar fea-tures of overlapping areas. For example, the sofa is mis-takenly classified the dog in overlapping areas as shown in
Figure 1 (a).
To overcome the above drawbacks, recent academic at-tention has been leaned toward anchor-free object detec-tors [4,5,19,20,27,30,33–35,37]. Replacing preset anchors, these anchor-free detectors use a set of points (e.g., prede-fined corners [5], center points [4, 27, 34], border points
[19, 35] or key points [30]) as object representations and then group these points into a bounding box. However, these discrete points are easy to lose their adjacent infor-mation, which makes it difficult to determine whether the scattered points belong to the same object. As shown in
Figure 1 (b), the sofa is difficult to be detected due to the coarse feature of single center point.
In Figure 1(c), the sofa can not be tightly surrounded by a bounding box.
In this paper, we propose CrossDet, a new flexible and efficient anchor-free object detection network that uses learned cross lines as object representations. Because the goal of object detection is to tightly surround the object by a bounding box, it is important to focus on the information in the horizontal and vertical directions. Compared with the other representations as shown in Figure 1, the crosslines are adaptively grown to the boundary box of object along the horizontal and vertical directions. On the one hand, it can flexibly represent objects using cross lines of various combinations, and extract features by avoiding the features of overlapping areas. On the other hand, it takes into the continuous adjacent object features, and helps to perceive the change of object features, so as to better find object boundaries.
Based on the learned lines, we design a novel crossline extraction module to adaptively integrate the line features along the horizontal and vertical directions, which can be flexibly plugged into object detection network. Specifically, this module first encodes axis-aware long-range context by average pooling in the horizontal or vertical spatial dimen-sion, and then selectively samples line features as object representation. Based on the extracted features, we utilize a decoupled regression mechanism to regress the offsets and scales of horizontal and vertical lines respectively, which restricts the regression range to a specific direction, and can effectively ease the optimize difficulty. Furthermore, the predicted crossline representation can be fed into the next stages to refine the detection results, which is coherently across multiple stages. We conduct extensive experiments on two common benchmarks to demonstrate the effective-ness of our CrossDet.
The main contributions are summarized as:
• We propose a novel anchor-free object detection net-work that is first attempt to use automatically growing cross lines to represent objects instead of anchor boxes or a set of keypoints.
• We design a crossline extraction module to adaptively aggregate the line features. Based on the extracted features, we design a decoupled regression mechanism to learn the horizontal and vertical lines separately.
• We validate the effectiveness of our method on the
PASCAL VOC and MS-COCO datasets. The results show that our proposed method is beneficial to accurate object detection. 2.