Abstract
Point cloud registration is the task of estimating the rigid transformation that aligns a pair of point cloud fragments.
We present an efﬁcient and robust framework for pairwise registration of real-world 3D scans, leveraging Hough vot-ing in the 6D transformation parameter space. First, deep geometric features are extracted from a point cloud pair to compute putative correspondences. We then construct a set of triplets of correspondences to cast votes on the 6D Hough space, representing the transformation param-eters in sparse tensors. Next, a fully convolutional reﬁne-ment module is applied to reﬁne the noisy votes. Finally, we identify the consensus among the correspondences from the Hough space, which we use to predict our ﬁnal trans-formation parameters. Our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods on 3DMatch and 3DLoMatch benchmarks while achieving comparable performance on KITTI odom-etry dataset. We further demonstrate the generalizability of our approach by setting a new state-of-the-art on ICL-NUIM dataset, where we integrate our module into a multi-way registration pipeline. 1.

Introduction
Point cloud registration is one of the fundamental tasks in modern 3D computer vision, aiming to estimate the rigid transformation parameter to align a partially overlapping pair of point cloud fragments. It plays a vital role in au-tonomous driving, robotics, augmented reality, and other various applications. The objective function of pairwise point cloud registration can be formulated as:
E(R, t) = (cid:88) (cid:107)q − Rp − t(cid:107)2, (1) 1
N (p,q)∈C where p, q ∈ R3 are points of a correspondence, C is the set of all true correspondences between the point cloud pair,
N is the cardinality of C, and R ∈ SO(3), t ∈ R3 are the rotation matrix and the translation vector, respectively.
Therefore, point cloud registration is a dual problem of
Figure 1. Pairwise point cloud registration results of DGR [10] (ﬁrst column) and ours (second column) on 3DMatch dataset [56].
Our method is robust under low overlap and repetitive structures while being about twice as fast as DGR. Best viewed in color.
ﬁnding inlier correspondences and optimizing transforma-tion parameters to minimize the geometric errors on these correspondences. Prior research on this topic can be cat-egorized into geometric feature descriptors [4, 13, 16, 17, 23, 44, 50], pose optimization algorithms [5, 19, 58], and the recent learning-based feature extraction and registration pipelines [2, 10, 22, 52, 53]. Despite the impressive perfor-mances of recent end-to-end pipelines, they either require a strong assumption on the high overlapping ratio of point clouds [52], lack scalability to be operable on large-scale point clouds [53], or rely on iterative post-processing [10].
We propose a novel robust registration pipeline for large-scale point cloud fragment pairs to address these issues, yielding accurate rotation and translation predictions even in low point cloud overlap ratios. The key idea is to view the registration problem as ﬁnding a consensus among the candidate correspondences on a discretized 6D transforma-point cloud into high dimensional embedding space, and performs a permutation-invariant operation to aggregate features into a single global descriptor. PerfectMatch [23] uses a smoothed density value (SDV) representation com-puted for each interest point, demonstrating rotation in-variance and high generalizability. FCGF [13] leverages a fully-convolutional 3D network and metric learning losses to extract features that outperform PerfectMatch while be-ing up to 290 times faster. However, these approaches focus mainly on feature descriptors, with little attention to feature detectors. D3Feat [4] therefore predicts detection scores with the features for each 3D point, showing that sampling features with higher scores is sufﬁcient to achieve accurate and fast alignment. These learning-based approaches out-perform hand-crafted geometric features [31, 45, 47, 48, 51] which are sensitive to hyperparameter settings.
Robust model ﬁtting. Correspondences obtained from fea-ture matching often contain high proportions of outliers, which have to be ﬁltered out for robust point cloud regis-tration. One of the most widely used methods is RANdom
SAmple Consensus (RANSAC) and its variants [1, 27, 37, 45, 49], where a set of candidate correspondences are sam-pled every iteration, and an alignment is produced based on these correspondences to be evaluated.
Hough transform [29] was ﬁrst introduced as a voting scheme to detect lines by discretizing parameter space into bins. SIFT [34] clusters features in pose space using Hough transform to estimate object poses. PHM [8] and HPF [39] applies this idea to efﬁcient and robust matching algorithms for the task of object discovery and semantic correspon-dence, respectively. VoteNet [41] votes for object centers in 3D space to predict 3D bounding boxes for object detec-tion. More recently, CHMNet [38] proposes to carry out local geometric matching using the idea of Hough voting to identify matches between images of the same category.
Our approach is inspired by recent methods using Hough voting, and we discretize the spatial transformation param-eter space into sparse bins. We then vote on the sparse 6D space to predict the transformation parameters robustly based on the consensus from feature correspondences.
Global registration frameworks. Iterative Closest Points (ICP) [5] is a widely used approach due to its reliable per-formance in local registration. However, it requires an ap-propriate initial pose to avoid local minima and performs expensive nearest-neighbor queries in their inner loops.
Other approaches make use of branch-and-bound [36], semi-deﬁnite programming [35], or maximal clique selec-tion [54]. These methods exhibit high accuracy but require time-consuming iterative sampling or heavier computation as the inlier ratio decreases. FGR [58] and SparseICP [6] use robust objective functions to ﬁlter out outliers during optimization. While FGR shows much shorter registration
Figure 2. Registration recall and the number of registration per second in log scale on 3DMatch benchmark. Our approach is the most accurate overall and fastest among learning-based methods. tion space, leveraging Hough voting with sparse tensors.
Using the noisy candidate correspondences, we accumulate votes into discrete bins of the Hough space. After all the votes are cast, we use a learnable reﬁnement module on the
Hough space to ﬁlter the noisy vote values. Finally, the bin with maximum votes implies consensus among the candi-date correspondences, which we use as our ﬁnal prediction for the transformation parameters between the point cloud pair. The Hough space is sparsely constructed to facilitate small-sized bins for higher accuracy while incurring signiﬁ-cantly less memory overhead than a dense parameter space.
The contributions of our work are as follows:
• We propose a novel approach for point cloud regis-tration using Hough voting, where our sparse 6D pa-rameter space improves the accuracy and memory ef-ﬁciency of our approach,
• We propose a learnable reﬁnement module on the
Hough space to enhance the representability of our sparse parameter space for increased robustness,
• We achieve a new state-of-the-art on the real-world in-door 3DMatch [56]/3DLoMatch [30] datasets, and per-form comparably on the outdoor KITTI [21] dataset,
• We prove our approach’s generalizability by integrat-ing our into a multi-way registration pipeline, evalu-ated on [26] to set a new state of the art,
• Our method exhibits faster speed compared to other learning-based registration pipelines. 2.