Abstract
Classical close-set semantic segmentation networks have limited ability to detect out-of-distribution (OOD) ob-jects, which is important for safety-critical applications such as autonomous driving. Incrementally learning these
OOD objects with few annotations is an ideal way to en-large the knowledge base of the deep learning models. In this paper, we propose an open world semantic segmenta-tion system that includes two modules: (1) an open-set se-mantic segmentation module to detect both in-distribution and OOD objects. (2) an incremental few-shot learning module to gradually incorporate those OOD objects into its existing knowledge base. This open world semantic segmentation system behaves like a human being, which is able to identify OOD objects and gradually learn them with corresponding supervision. We adopt the Deep Met-ric Learning Network (DMLNet) with contrastive cluster-ing to implement open-set semantic segmentation. Com-pared to other open-set semantic segmentation methods, our DMLNet achieves state-of-the-art performance on three challenging open-set semantic segmentation datasets with-out using additional data or generative models. On this basis, two incremental few-shot learning methods are fur-ther proposed to progressively improve the DMLNet with the annotations of OOD objects. 1.

Introduction
Deep convolutional networks have achieved tremendous success in semantic segmentation tasks [1, 2], benefiting from high-quality datasets [3, 4, 5]. These semantic seg-mentation networks are used as the perception system in many applications, like autonomous driving [6], medical di-agnose [7], etc. However, most of these perception systems are close-set and static. Close-set semantic segmentation is subject to the assumption that all classes in testing are already involved during training, which is not true in the open world. A close-set system could cause disastrous con-sequences in security-critical applications, like autonomous driving, if it wrongly assigns an in-distribution label to an
OOD object [8]. Meanwhile, a static perception system can-not update its knowledge base according to what it has seen,
Figure 1. Open world semantic segmentation system. Step 1:
Identify both known and unknown objects (blue arrow). Step 2:
Annotate for unknown objects (red arrow). Step 3: Apply incre-mental few-shot learning to increase the classification range of the network (green arrow). Step 4: After incremental few-shot learn-ing, DMLNet can output the result in a larger domain (purple ar-row). and therefore, it is limited to particular scenarios and needs to be retrained after a certain amout of time. To solve these problems, we propose an open-set and dynamic perception system called the open world semantic segmentation sys-tem. It contains two modules: (1) an open-set semantic segmentation module to detect OOD objects and assign correct labels to in-distribution objects. (2) an incremental few-shot learning module to incorporate those unknown objects progressively into its existing knowledge base. The whole pipeline of our proposed open world semantic seg-mentation system is shown in Fig. 1.
Both open-set semantic segmentation and incremental few-shot learning are not well solved. For open-set seman-tic segmentation, the essential part is to identify OOD pixels among all pixels in one image which is called anomaly seg-mentation. The typical approach of anomaly segmentation is to adapt methods of image-level open-set classification for pixel-level open-set classification. These methods in-clude uncertainty estimation-based methods [9, 10, 11, 12] and autoencoder-based methods [13, 14]. However, both of these methods have been proved ineffective in driving sce-narios as uncertainty estimation-based methods give many false-positive outlier detections [15] and autoencoders can-not regenerate complicated urban scenarios [16]. Recently, generative adversarial network-based (GAN-based) meth-ods [16, 17] have been proved effective but they are far from lightweight as they need several deep networks in the pipeline. For incremental few-shot learning, we have to deal with challenges not only from the incremental learn-ing, such as catastrophic forgetting [18], but also from the few-shot learning, including extracting representative fea-tures from a small number of samples [19].
In this paper, we propose to use the DMLNet to solve the open world semantic segmentation problem. The rea-sons are threefold: (1) The classification principle of the
DMLNet is based on contrastive clustering, which is effec-tive to identify anomalous objects, as shown in Fig. 2. (2)
The DMLNet combined with prototypes is very suitable for few-shot tasks [19]. (3) Incremental learning of the DML-Net can be implemented by adding new prototypes, which is a natural and useful approach [20]. Based on the DML-Net architecture, we develop two unknown identification criteria for the open-set semantic segmentation module and two methods for the incremental few-shot learning module.
Both modules are verified to be effective and lightweight according to our experiments. To summarize, our contribu-tions are the following:
• We are the first to introduce the open world semantic segmentation system, which is more robust and practi-cal in real-world applications.
• Our proposed open-set semantic segmentation module based on the DMLNet achieves state-of-the-art perfor-mance on three challenging datasets.
• Our proposed methods for the few-shot incremental learning module alleviate the catastrophic forgetting problem to a large extent.
• An open world semantic segmentation system is ful-filled by combining our proposed open-set semantic segmentation module and incremental few-shot learn-ing module. 2.