Abstract
Underexposed image enhancement is of importance in many research domains. In this paper, we take this prob-lem as image feature transformation between the underex-posed image and its paired enhanced version, and we pro-pose a deep symmetric network for the issue. Our sym-metric network adapts invertible neural networks (INN) for bidirectional feature learning between images, and to en-sure the mutual propagation invertible we specifically con-struct two pairs of encoder-decoder with the same pre-trained parameters. This invertible mechanism with bidi-rectional feature transformations enable us to both avoid colour bias and recover the content effectively for im-In addition, we propose a new recur-age enhancement. rent residual-attention module (RRAM), where the recur-rent learning network is designed to gradually perform the desired colour adjustments. Ablation experiments are exe-cuted to show the role of each component of our new ar-chitecture. We conduct a large number of experiments on two datasets to demonstrate that our method achieves the state-of-the-art effect in underexposed image enhancement.
Code is available at https://www.shaopinglu. net/proj-iccv21/ImageEnhancement.html. 1.

Introduction
Digital photography is gaining increasing popularity thanks to the abundance of digital cameras widely used in day-to-day life. Still, poor shooting environment, inap-propriate camera parameters, or lack of photographic skills can result in unsatisfactory image quality. Many times it is necessary to adjust the exposure-aware aspects of the photograph including the colour and local details in post-processing.
*indicates equal contribution.
Image enhancement still remains a challenge especially for underexposed images. To enhance the image qual-ity, both colour adjustments are required, and preserva-tion of the content-features of the image. Traditional al-gorithms with global adjustments, such as histogram equal-ization [31,40,41], contrast adjustment [18,44] and Gamma correction [22,42] are incapable of editing and changing the local details in the image. Recent methods based on deep neural networks [7, 11, 21, 34, 46] can still suffer from ei-ther colour bias or artifacts in complex underexposed con-ditions. Specifically, when the picture is taken in a low-light environment, the visual features are hidden in dark areas.
To correct this situation, not only colour adjustments are needed, but also content recovery (see an example in Fig. 1).
Some methods attempt to deal with these requirements by employing multiple different modules separately. However, this scheme may introduce accumulated training errors, and result in visual artifacts.
In this paper, we formulate the image enhancement prob-lem as an unified framework of invertible feature transfor-mation between an image pair: an underexposed image and its enhanced version (that can be the ground truth during training). Therefore, we propose a deep symmetric network based on an invertible feature transformer (IFT) inspired by the latest invertible neural networks (INN) [1, 8, 27, 48]. In order to make the forward and backward propagation op-erations highly solvable, two pairs of pre-trained encoder-decoder, which exactly share the same parameters, are specifically designed to apply the mutual conversion be-tween the image pair ( i.e. , the underexposed and enhanced images) and the corresponding features. Our symmetric network carries out the forward and backward learning syn-chronously, and successfully solves the image colour bias problem caused by the lack of massive training data of paired images and the difficulty of learning color features.
To accurately restore the desired features of the image, we further propose a recurrent learning schedule with a re-Figure 1. The results of different methods on challenging images. DeepUPE [46] and DeepLPF [34] are the state-of-the-art methods now.
Our method can effectively adjust the image colour while ensuring the structure and texture features of the images. current residual-attention module (RRAM). Because differ-ent weights are assigned to different channels of the fea-ture map, our network can focus on recovering the struc-ture feature information. Without increasing the number of network parameters, the recurrent learning allows our net-work to learn the complex feature transformation in a step-wise manner, and then realize the adjustments of the image colour. Extensive experiments on public datasets confirm the superiority of our method.
In summary, our contributions can be listed as follows:
• To our best knowledge, we are the first to introduce invertible neural networks (INN) into underexposed image enhancement. Our symmetric architecture per-forms bidirectional feature learning synchronously, achieving state-of-the-art results compared against other underexposed image enhancement solutions.
• We propose a recurrent learning scheme of fea-ture transformation with a recurrent residual-attention module (RRAM), allowing to apply colour adjustment gradually without increasing network parameters. 2.