Abstract
Deep neural representations of 3D shapes as implicit func-tions have been shown to produce high ﬁdelity models sur-passing the resolution-memory trade-off faced by the ex-plicit representations using meshes and point clouds. How-ever, most such approaches focus on representing closed shapes. Unsigned distance function (UDF) based ap-proaches have been proposed recently as a promising al-ternative to represent both open and closed shapes. How-ever, since the gradients of UDFs vanish on the surface, it is challenging to estimate local (differential) geometric prop-erties like the normals and tangent planes which are needed for many downstream applications in vision and graphics.
There are additional challenges in computing these prop-erties efﬁciently with a low-memory footprint. This paper presents a novel approach that models such surfaces us-ing a new class of implicit representations called the closest surface-point (CSP) representation. We show that CSP al-lows us to represent complex surfaces of any topology (open or closed) with high ﬁdelity. It also allows for accurate and
*indicates two authors equally advised efﬁcient computation of local geometric properties. We fur-ther demonstrate that it leads to efﬁcient implementation of downstream algorithms like sphere-tracing for render-ing the 3D surface as well as to create explicit mesh-based representations. Extensive experimental evaluation on the
ShapeNet dataset validate the above contributions with re-sults surpassing the state-of-the-art. Code and data are available at https://sites.google.com/view/cspnet. 1.

Introduction
High ﬁdelity representation and rendering of potentially open 3D surfaces with complex topology from raw sen-sor data (images, point clouds) ﬁnds application in vision, graphics and animation industry [19]. Therefore, in recent years deep learning based methods for 3D reconstruction of objects have garnered signiﬁcant interest [36, 32, 29].
Explicit 3D shape representations such as point clouds, voxels, triangles or quad meshes pose challenges in re-constructing surfaces with arbitrary topology [31]. More-over, the ability to capture details of such representations are limited by predeﬁned structure (like number of ver-tices for meshes) or memory and computational footprint
(for voxels and point clouds). Several implicit shape rep-resentations using deep neural networks have been pro-posed [32, 29, 13, 7, 2, 9] to alleviate these shortcomings.
Recent approaches use a distance function as the im-plicit representation. For example, DeepSDF [32] use a
Signed Distance Function (SDF) as the implicit representa-tion where the sign represents the inside/outside of the sur-face being modeled. Not only does this limit DeepSDF to modeling closed surfaces, the ground truth needs to be wa-tertight (closed) as well. Since most 3D shape datasets [5] have non-watertight (open) shapes, preprocessing is needed to artiﬁcially close such shapes and make them water-tight [29] - a process which is known to result in a loss of
ﬁdelity [21]. To overcome this problem, methods such as
SAL [2] seek to learn surface representations directly from raw unoriented point clouds. However, such methods also make an assumption that the underlying surface represented by the point cloud is closed, leading to learnt representa-tions necessarily describing closed shapes [3].
NDF [9] overcomes this limitation by using an unsigned distance function (UDF) based implicit representation and achieves state-of-the-art performance on 3D shape repre-sentation learnt directly from the unprocessed ShapeNet dataset. However, UDFs have a fundamental limitation.
Since the gradient of the UDF vanishes on the surface, di-rect estimation of local, differential geometric properties like the tangent plane and the surface normal becomes noisy and loses ﬁdelity. This results in a loss of performance on downstream tasks like rendering and surface reconstruc-tion [22] as well as those like registration [34] and segmen-tation [17] where normal estimates play a vital role.
An additional issue is that for the above methods, the es-timation of differential geometric properties needs a back-ward pass leading to increased memory footprint and time complexity. This becomes a challenge for applications which require fast rendering on devices with limited mem-ory (e.g. tiled rendering on hand-held devices [12]), or for robotics tasks such as real-time path planning where fast normal estimates in 3D space play an essential role [14, 30].
To address these challenges, we introduce a novel im-plicit shape representation called the Closest Surface-Point (CSP) function, which for a given query point returns the closest point on the surface. We demonstrate that CSP can model open and closed shapes of arbitrary topology, and in contrast to NDF, allows for the easy computation of differ-ential geometric properties like the tangent plane and the surface normal. Moreover, as opposed to existing implicit representations and demonstrated later, it can efﬁciently re-cover normal information with a forward pass. A compara-tive summary of the properties discussed above for CSP and the most related art is presented in Table 1. We also present a panel of illustrative results in Fig. 1 which clearly demon-strates the higher ﬁdelity with which complex surfaces are
Method
DeepSDF [32]
SAL [2]
NDF [9]
CSP (Ours)
Learning from
Triangle Soups (cid:55) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88)
Representation Power
Complex
Topology (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88)
High
Fidelity (cid:88) (cid:55) (cid:55) (cid:88)
Open
Shapes (cid:55) (cid:55) (cid:88) (cid:88)
Single pass normal estimation (cid:55) (cid:55) (cid:55) (cid:88)
Table 1: Comparison between CSP and closely related arts. represented by CSP when compared with SAL and NDF.
Finally, we show that due to the above beneﬁts, CSP is not only a potential method of choice for learning high ﬁ-delity 3D representations of complex topologies (open as well as closed) from the raw data, but also for many down-stream applications. For this, we present (a) a fast and memory efﬁcient rendering algorithm using an adaptation of sphere-tracing for CSPs that leverages the accurate sur-face normal estimates that CSP provides, and, (b) since it is often required to extract an explicit surface representa-tion [1], we present a coarse to ﬁne meshing algorithm for
CSPs, that can recover high-ﬁdelity meshes faster than prior methods [9]. To summarize, our contributions are:
• CSP: A high ﬁdelity representation capable of mod-elling both open and closed shapes, allowing for efﬁ-cient estimation of differential geometric properties of the surface (Sec. 3.1) - an advancement over NDF.
• Normal estimation with a forward pass that signiﬁ-cantly accelerates speed and memory efﬁciency of ren-dering (Sec. 3.2).
• A faster multi-resolution surface extraction technique (Sec. 3.3.2) to extract meshes from CSP, achieving bet-ter speed and quality than existing techniques [9]. 2.