Abstract
It is widely acknowledged that single image super-resolution (SISR) methods would not perform well if the assumed degradation model deviates from those in real im-ages. Although several degradation models take additional factors into consideration, such as blur, they are still not ef-fective enough to cover the diverse degradations of real im-ages. To address this issue, this paper proposes to design a more complex but practical degradation model that consists of randomly shuffled blur, downsampling and noise degra-dations. Specifically, the blur is approximated by two con-volutions with isotropic and anisotropic Gaussian kernels; the downsampling is randomly chosen from nearest, bilin-ear and bicubic interpolations; the noise is synthesized by adding Gaussian noise with different noise levels, adopting
JPEG compression with different quality factors, and gen-erating processed camera sensor noise via reverse-forward camera image signal processing (ISP) pipeline model and
RAW image noise model. To verify the effectiveness of the new degradation model, we have trained a deep blind ES-RGAN super-resolver and then applied it to super-resolve both synthetic and real images with diverse degradations.
The experimental results demonstrate that the new degra-dation model can help to significantly improve the practi-cability of deep super-resolvers, thus providing a powerful alternative solution for real SISR applications. 1.

Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR), which aims to reconstruct the natural and sharp detailed high-resolution (HR) counterpart x from a low-resolution (LR) image y [10, 47], has recently drawn significant attention due to its high practical value. With the advance of deep neural networks (DNNs), there is a dramatic upsurge of using feed-forward DNNs for fast and effective SISR [17, 23, 25, 27, 49, 61]. This paper contributes to this strand.
Whereas SISR methods map an LR image onto an HR counterpart, degradation models define how to map an HR image to an LR one. Two representative degradation mod-els are bicubic degradation [46] and traditional degrada-tion [28, 45]. The former generates an LR image via bicubic interpolation. The latter can be mathematically modeled by y = (x ⊗ k) ↓s + n. (1)
It assumes the LR image is obtained by first convolving the
HR image with a Gaussian kernel (or point spread function) k [12] to get a blurry image x ⊗ k, followed by a down-sampling operation ↓s with scale factor s and an addition of white Gaussian noise n with standard deviation σ. Specif-ically, the bicubic degradation can be viewed as a special case of traditional degradation as it can be approximated by setting a proper kernel with zero noise [3, 52]. The degrada-tion model is generally characterized by several factors such as blur kernel and noise level. Depending on whether these factors are known beforehand or not, DNNs-based SISR methods can be broadly divided into non-blind methods and blind ones.
Early non-blind SISR methods were mainly designed for bicubic degradations [10]. Although significant improve-ments on the PSNR [27, 61] and perceptual quality [24, 49] have been achieved, such methods usually do not perform well on real images. It is worth noting that this also holds for deep models trained with a generative adversarial loss.
The reason is that blur kernels play a vital role for the success of SISR methods [12] and a bicubic kernel is too simple. To remedy this, some works use a more complex degradation model which involves a blur kernel and addi-tive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) and a non-blind network that takes the blur kernel and noise level as conditional in-puts [3, 58]. Compared to methods based on bicubic degra-dation, these tend to be more applicable. Yet, they need an accurate estimation of the kernel and the noise level. Oth-erwise the performance deteriorates seriously [12]. Mean-while, only a few methods are specially designed for the
kernel estimation of SISR [3]. As a further step, some blind methods propose to fuse the kernel estimation into the network design [16, 31]. But such methods still fail to produce visually pleasant results for most real images such as JPEG compressed ones. Along another line of blind
SISR work with unpaired LR/HR training data, the kernel and the noise are first extracted from the LR images and then used to synthesize LR images from the HR images for paired training [20]. Notably, without kernel estima-tion, the blind model still has a promising performance. On the other hand, it is difficult to collect accurate blur kernels and noise models from real images. From the above dis-cussion, we draw two conclusions. Firstly, the degradation model is of vital importance to DNNs-based SISR methods and a more practical degradation model is worth studying.
Secondly, no existing blind SISR models are readily appli-cable to super-resolve real images suffering from different degradation types. Hence, we see two main challenges: the first is to design a more practical SISR degradation model for real images, and the second is to learn an effective deep blind model that can work well for most real images. In this paper, we attempt to solve these two challenges.
For the first challenge, we argue that blur, downsam-pling and noise are the three key factors that contribute to the degradation of real images. Rather than utilizing Gaus-sian kernel induced blur, bicubic downsampling, and simple noise models, we propose to expand each of these factors to more practical ones. Specifically, the blur is achieved by two convolutions with an isotropic Gaussian kernel and an anisotropic Gaussian kernel; the downsampling is more general but includes commonly-used downscaling opera-tors such as bilinear and bicubic interpolations; the noise is modeled by AWGN with different noise levels, JPEG compression noise with different quality factors, and pro-cessed camera sensor noise by applying reverse-forward camera image signal processing (ISP) pipeline model and
RAW image noise model. Furthermore, instead of us-ing the commonly-used blur/downsampling/noise-addition pipeline, we perform randomly shuffled degradations to synthesize LR images. As a result, our new degrada-tion model involves several more adjustable parameters and aims to cover the degradation space of real images.
For the second challenge, we train a deep model based on the new degradation model in an end-to-end supervised manner. Given an HR image, we can synthesize differ-ent realistic LR images by setting different parameters for the degradation model. As such, an unlimited number of paired LR/HR training data can be generated for training.
Especially noteworthy is that such training data do not suf-fer from the misalignment issue. By further taking advan-tage of the powerful expressiveness and advanced training of DNNs, the deep blind model is expected to produce vi-sually pleasant results for real LR images.
The contributions of this paper are: 1) A practical SISR degradation model for real images is designed. It considers more complex degradations for blur, downsampling and noise and, more importantly, involves a degradation shuffle strategy. 2) With synthetic training data generated using our degra-dation model, a blind SISR model is trained. It per-forms well on real images under diverse degradations. 3) To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to adopt a new hand-designed degradation model for gen-eral blind image super-resolution. 4) Our work highlights the importance of accurate degra-dation modeling for practical applications of DNNs-based SISR methods. 2.