Abstract
Exploiting convolutional neural networks for point cloud processing is quite challenging, due to the inherent irregu-lar distribution and discrete shape representation of point clouds. To address these problems, many handcrafted con-volution variants have sprung up in recent years. Though with elaborate design, these variants could be far from op-timal in sufﬁciently capturing diverse shapes formed by dis-crete points. In this paper, we propose PointSeaConv, i.e., a novel differential convolution search paradigm on point clouds.
It can work in a purely data-driven manner and thus is capable of auto-creating a group of suitable con-volutions for geometric shape modeling. We also propose a joint optimization framework for simultaneous search of internal convolution and external architecture, and intro-duce epsilon-greedy algorithm to alleviate the effect of dis-cretization error. As a result, PointSeaNet, a deep network that is sufﬁcient to capture geometric shapes at both con-volution level and architecture level, can be searched out for point cloud processing. Extensive experiments strong-ly evidence that our proposed PointSeaNet surpasses cur-rent handcrafted deep models on challenging benchmarks across multiple tasks with remarkable margins. 1.

Introduction
Recently, 3D point cloud processing has received great attention, since it plays an important role in the ﬁelds of autonomous driving, robotics, geomatics, and so on. Nev-ertheless, compared with 2D image processing, this task is quite challenging due to the non-grid structure and orderless permutation of point clouds. Furthermore, it is extremely difﬁcult to perform shape analysis for point clouds, as the underlying shape formed by those discrete points is visually
∗Corresponding author.
Figure 1. A sketch of the proposed convolution search paradigm, i.e., PointSeaConv. PointSeaConv is achieved by constructing a dynamic and learnable directed acyclic graph (DAG). Most hand-crafted convolutions can be regarded as its special cases. elusive to capture.
In order to tackle this task, many geometric descrip-tors [56] have been manually designed over the past decades. Though usable in certain scenarios, these descrip-tors often suffer from unsatisfactory performance and poor task-adaptivity. Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNN) in deep learning technologies has made remarkable achievements in the processing of regular data, e.g., image
[22, 45], video [48], and speech [37]. Accordingly, there has been a growing interest in exploiting the power of CNN for irregular point cloud processing [33, 44, 58].
To facilitate the application of classic CNN, some re-searchers transform point clouds into regular multi-view images [13, 50] or voxel grids [42, 71]. While practica-ble, these transformations usually lead to the loss of shape information because of self-occlusions or quantization arti-facts. As a pioneer, PointNet [43] learns directly on point
clouds with shared multi-layer perceptrons (MLP) and max-pooling operation. Despite its encouraging performance on shape analysis, PointNet has difﬁculty in learning ﬁne-grained shape representation due to the lack of local mod-eling. To overcome this issue, PointNet++ [44] builds an explicit local-to-global CNN-like architecture with multiple set abstraction layers. However, it performs convolution by simply applying PointNet on the local regions, which could be powerless in capturing diverse local structures.
Plenty of follow-up research, therefore, is devoted to manually design convolution variants, which is expected to grasp local structures well. The typical methods along this route are EdgeConv [58], PointCNN [29], RS-Conv [33],
KPConv [54], PointConv [59], and so on. They either con-struct local graph connections collocated with graph con-volution methods, or empirically introduce local geometric statistics (e.g., density) into convolution operation. Though achieving decent performance, these convolutions greatly depend on heuristic rules and experienced engineering.
In this paper, we argue that the manually-designed con-volution could be suboptimal for point cloud processing, e-specially in the era of data-driven deep learning. The key challenge for convolution learning on point clouds is how to make it being capable to sufﬁciently capture diverse lo-cal structures. This motivates us, accordingly, to construct an auto-created convolution search paradigm, which can be directly driven by irregular structures in point clouds.
To this end, we propose PointSeaConv, i.e., a novel d-ifferentiable convolution search paradigm on point clouds.
Concretely, we ﬁrst formulate a general convolution for ge-ometric structure modeling and transform it into a search-able process. This is achieved by constructing a dynamic and learnable directed acyclic graph (DAG). Consequently, the convolution expression can be determined by the DAG while the convolution weight can be learned on the DAG.
Moreover, most handcrafted convolutions can be regarded as special cases of our searchable one (Fig. 1). We then develop a joint and differentiable optimization framework for optimizing the search of internal convolution and ex-ternal architecture, simultaneously. Especially, the epsilon-greedy algorithm is introduced into the search process, which greatly alleviates the effect of discretization error. As a result, PointSeaNet, a deep network that captures geomet-ric structures at both convolution level and architecture lev-el, can be searched out for point cloud processing.
The key contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel differentiable convolution search paradigm, i.e., PointSeaConv. It can work in a purely data-driven manner and thus is capable of creating a group of suitable convolutions for point cloud process-ing. To our best knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to conduct fundamental convolution search on point clouds.
• We propose a joint and differential optimization frame-work for simultaneous search of internal convolu-tion and external architecture. Under the framework,
PointSeaNet, a deep network that sufﬁciently captures geometric structures of point clouds at both convolu-tion level and architecture level, can be searched out.
• We innovatively introduce epsilon-greedy algorithm into the search framework. Thanks to the algorithm, the adverse effect of discretization error can be greatly alleviated during the whole search process. 2.