Abstract
General face recognition has seen remarkable progress in recent years. However, large age gap still remains a big challenge due to significant alterations in facial appear-ance and bone structure. Disentanglement plays a key role in partitioning face representations into identity-dependent and age-dependent components for age-invariant face recognition (AIFR). In this paper we propose a multi-task learning framework based on mutual information minimiza-tion (MT-MIM), which casts the disentangled representa-tion learning as an objective of information constraints.
The method trains a disentanglement network to minimize mutual information between the identity component and age component of the face image from the same person, and re-duce the effect of age variations during the identification process. For quantitative measure of the degree of disen-tanglement, we verify that mutual information can repre-sent as metric. The resulting identity-dependent representa-tions are used for age-invariant face recognition. We evalu-ate MT-MIM on popular public-domain face aging datasets (FG-NET, MORPH Album 2, CACD and AgeDB) and ob-tained significant improvements over previous state-of-the-art methods. Specifically, our method exceeds the baseline models by over 0.4% on MORPH Album 2, and over 0.7% on CACD subsets, which are impressive improvements at the high accuracy levels of above 99% and an average of 94%. 1.

Introduction
Face recognition is one of the most widely and thor-oughly studied topics in computer vision. From traditional methods [45, 36, 33, 28, 15, 49] to the more recent deep learning based algorithms [15, 51, 50, 47, 10, 59], it has achieved excellent performance, even surpassing humans in various scenarios.
Among all the face recognition systems, age-invariant
*Corresponding author
Figure 1. Example images for AIFR. The two ends of a line are the same person. It is common in AIFR where intra-class varia-tions are greater than inter-class for large age gaps. Consequently, not only human get confused, but most general face recognition models also degrade by a scale of over 13% [5]. face recognition has a wide range of application scenar-ios that are of great significance, including finding miss-ing children after years, fugitive identification and passport verification. However, despite the exciting progress in face recognition, aging variation in these practical applications remains under-explored during the design and testing of face recognition systems. There are three challenging as-pects for age-invariant face recognition (AIFR): 1) Aging related alterations in face appearance and anatomy result in significant intra-class variations, which increase as the age gaps get lager. 2) Face aging is a complex process affected dramatically by intrinsic and extrinsic factors (i.e. heredity, gender, environment). It has a compound impact on facial shapes and textures simultaneously, making age-invariant patterns learning difficult. 3) Current cross-age databases are insufficient for training with unbalanced distributions of age and gender, which limits the performance of AIFR.
Figure 1 shows a typical scene of different individuals at the same age looking more similar than the same person at different age, for the reason that age-related information is shared among different identities, revealing the necessity of age variations disentanglement.
identity-tures into two nearly independent components: dependent component and age-dependent component. Fig-ure 3 illustrates the architecture of the proposed MT-MIM.
Compared to correlation coefficient, mutual information can capture the nonlinear statistical independence between variables, thus it can be used as a truly independent mea-sure [22]. By minimizing mutual information of the two components, we focus more on the identity-efficient infor-mation during age-invariant feature learning, leading to im-proved recognition performance on images with large age variations.
To sum up, our major contributions of this work include: 1) A novel objective to learn age-invariant face represen-tation by minimizing mutual information between identity-dependent component and age-dependent component. 2) We demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed ap-proach with several extensive experiments over four face aging datasets, including MORPH Album2 [38], CACD [6],
FG-NET [24] and AgeDB [32]. 2.