Abstract
Recent state-of-the-art learning-based approaches to point cloud registration have largely been based on graph neural networks (GNN). However, these prominent GNN backbones suffer from the indistinguishable features prob-lem associated with oversmoothing and structural ambigu-ity of the high-level features, a crucial bottleneck to point cloud registration that has evaded scrutiny in the recent relevant literature. To address this issue, we propose the
Distinctiveness oriented Positional Equilibrium (DoPE) module, a novel positional embedding scheme that signiﬁ-cantly improves the distinctiveness of the high-level features within both the source and target point clouds, resulting in superior point matching and hence registration accuracy.
Speciﬁcally, we use the DoPE module in an iterative regis-tration framework, whereby the two point clouds are gradu-ally registered via rigid transformations that are computed from DoPE’s position-aware features. With every successive iteration, the DoPE module feeds increasingly consistent positional information to would-be corresponding pairs, which in turn enhances the resulting point-to-point corre-spondence predictions used to estimate the rigid transfor-mation. Within only a few iterations, the network converges to a desired equilibrium, where the positional embeddings given to matching pairs become essentially identical. We validate the effectiveness of DoPE through comprehensive experiments on various registration benchmarks, registra-tion task settings, and prominent backbones, yielding un-precedented performance improvement across all combina-tions. 1.

Introduction
Point cloud registration is a well-known task by which two point clouds are matched via a rigid transformation.
For a source point cloud X and a target point cloud Y, the registration problem is ﬁnding a rigid transformation that minimizes the geometric shape differences between Y
*This work was done while Taewon Min, Chonghyuk Song, and Eun-seok Kim were with the Agency for Defense Development (ADD).
†Corresponding author: iwshim@add.re.kr and the transformed X . In many applications such as 3D reconstruction and simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM), the registration process has long relied on tradi-tional, non-learning-based algorithms to predict the optimal rigid transformations.
Recently, deep learning methods have brought remark-able advances in a variety of 3D vision tasks, ranging from classiﬁcation, segmentation, and, point cloud registration.
A common theme among many learning-based registration methods [18, 19, 24, 5, 25] is the fact they are comprised of 1) a feature extraction backbone, usually a graph neural network (GNN), which generates per-point feature descrip-tors via iterative local aggregation, followed by 2) a feature matching step, which computes point-to-point matchability scores, or (soft) correspondences, between the source and target point clouds using their extracted features.
For example, Deep Closest Point (DCP) [18] computes point correspondences from learned features, via atten-tion combined with pointer generation, in order to desen-sitize the network from initialization and avoid local min-ima. RPM-Net [24] incorporates Robust Point Matching (RPM) [3] into the feature matching step to be able to also handle outliers and missing correspondences. On the other hand, DeepGMR [25] avoids exhaustive point-to-point cor-respondences all together by learning correspondences from both point clouds to a common distribution inside a learned latent space.
While these recent methods have made signiﬁcant im-provements to the feature matching step and displayed state-of-the-art performance, they overlook a key design consid-eration for feature extraction that can critically affect reg-istration accuracy: the distinctiveness of the per-point fea-tures within both the source and target point clouds; that is, in order to obtain accurate point-to-point correspondences for estimating the optimal rigid transformation, the desired point features should sufﬁciently represent the geometric pattern in the neighborhood of any given point while still being distinguishable enough from the local patterns sur-rounding other points within the same point cloud. How-ever, many of the GNN backbones typically used to em-bed the input point clouds into the feature space [12, 20] are susceptible to oversmoothing [6, 17, 1] and structural
(a) GNNs only (b) Local attention (c) Non-local attention (d) DoPE∗ (e) DoPE∗∗
Figure 1: Visualization of indistinguishable features problem with cosine similarity scores in the feature space. The upper-row
ﬁgures represent the self-similarity matrices of the source point cloud; those in the bottom row visualize the similarity scores, in 3D space, between the point in the red enclosed circle with all points that comprise the chair. DoPE∗ and DoPE∗∗ use local and non-local attention, respectively, for feature disambiguation. The numbers beneath each ﬁgure denote the rotation (R) and translation (t) errors. Note that enhancing the intra-set distinctiveness consistently improves registration accuracy. ambiguity, resulting in indistinguishable point features. Fig-ure 1a demonstrates this phenomenon, henceforth referred to as the indistinguishable feature problem, which results in an overwhelming number of ambiguous point-to-point cor-respondences as opposed to the sharp matches desired for accurate registration.
To address these issues, we propose Distinctiveness oriented Positional Equilibrium (DoPE), a novel, light-weight positional embedding module that signiﬁcantly im-proves the intra-set distinctiveness of both the source and target point cloud embeddings, thereby enhancing the re-sulting point-to-point correspondences. Speciﬁcally, DoPE disambiguates the per-point features by augmenting them with global positional information computed with respect to the centroid of the combined source and target point clouds, which act as the origin of a shared coordinate sys-tem. We use this DoPE module in an iterative registration framework, where by the two point clouds are gradually aligned via rigid transformations that are computed from
DoPE’s position-aware features. The joint origin and the correspondence matrix are alternately reﬁned such that, the
DoPE module feeds increasingly consistent positional in-formation to would-be corresponding pairs and enhances the resulting correspondence predictions used to estimate the rigid transformation, which in turn updates the joint-origin used to provide positional embeddings in the next iteration. Within only a few iterations, the network con-verges to the so-called positional equilibrium, the desired
ﬁxed point with high registration accuracy where the posi-tional embeddings given to matching pairs become essen-tially identical. In summary, the contributions are as fol-lows:
• We identify and analyze the contributing factors to the indistinguishable features problem, a critical bot-tleneck to point-cloud registration that is prevalent in
GNN-based architectures but has evaded scrutiny in the recent registration literature.
• To address this issue, we propose the Distinctiveness oriented Positional Equilibrium (DoPE) module, a novel positional embedding scheme that disam-biguates point features and enhances the resulting rigid-transformation predictions. We use DoPE as part of an iterative registration framework, whereby the two point clouds are gradually aligned by rigid transforma-tions computed from DoPE’s position-aware features.
• We demonstrate the effectiveness of DoPE by incor-porating the module into the state-of-the-art registra-tion architectures and performing comprehensive ex-periments on various registration datasets and task set-tings, yielding unprecedented performance improve-ment across all combinations. 2.