Abstract
We propose a novel pointwise descriptor, called DWKS, aimed at finding correspondences across two deformable shape collections. Unlike the majority of existing descrip-tors, rather than capturing local geometry, DWKS cap-tures the deformation around a point within a collection in a multi-scale and informative manner. This, in turn, allows to compute inter-collection correspondences with-out using landmarks. To this end, we build upon the suc-cessful spectral WKS descriptors, but rather than using the Laplace-Beltrami operator, show that a similar con-struction can be performed on shape difference operators, that capture differences or distortion within a collection.
By leveraging the collection information our descriptor fa-cilitates difficult non-rigid shape matching tasks, even in the presence of strong partiality and significant deforma-tions. We demonstrate the utility of our approach across a range of challenging matching problems on both meshes and point clouds. The code for this paper can be found at https://github.com/RobinMagnet/DWKS 1.

Introduction
Shape matching is an ubiquitous problem in 3D com-puter vision, with various applications like texture and de-formation transfer. Numerous methods have therefore been developed during the last decade to compute correspon-dences between surfaces, relying on simple rigid deforma-tions to more recent learning-based models [44, 36].
While these methods have shown impressive results on several datasets, there remain some very challenging sce-narios especially when dealing with symmetries and non-isometric shapes. The existence of intrinsic symmetries in non-rigid shapes (e.g. left-right symmetry in a human shape) can be handled in multiple ways, using an orien-tation preserving constraint on shape descriptors [31], ex-ploring the space of maps [30], or adding priors through learning-based methods [23, 34, 9]. These methods respec-Figure 1. Our method uses two collections of noisy point-clouds with roughly similar deformations (left) and outputs a point-wise inter-collection map (right). tively require the existence of precise shape descriptors, an automatic selection of symmetric and non-symmetric map, and large datasets for neural network training. The case of non-isometric shapes is typically addressed either by requir-ing user-specified landmarks [1, 11, 38] or again, through extensive neural network training [14], among many other approaches. In the specific case of partial non-rigid shape matching, several methods have been developed [33, 24], relying on theoretical properties of the changes to the
Laplace-Beltrami operator under partiality.
Remarkably while 3D shapes often come in the context of a collection, very few methods [39, 5] have tried to lever-age the commonality of the deformations that exist within the collections to facilitate matching across them, e.g. to disambiguate such symmetries or address partiality. No-tably while matching two human shapes in resting pose can suffer from their intrinsic symmetry ambiguity, using infor-mation from the deformed version of these shapes with e.g.
their left knee up could help disambiguate their symmetries.
Figure 1 exhibits how local deformations of the knees when jumping on one leg allow to compute correspondences be-tween two human shapes, even when the upper-half of the body is missing.
In this work we propose to develop a local descriptor of differences between surfaces and point clouds. Our method is inspired by successful spectral point-based descriptors extracted from the Laplace-Beltrami operator [43, 2]. Our main insight is that a similar construction can be performed on other functional operators, leading to informative de-scriptors that capture different properties of shapes and col-lections.
In our work, we use shape difference operators
[35] that have been used for both analysing deformations within a collection [16] and even shape synthesis [19]. In the context of cross-collection mapping, shape difference operators have been used in [39, 5] as global objectives within the functional map framework, which can limit their utility to complete shape matching.
Instead, we demon-strate that pointwise spectral descriptors can successfully be extracted from shape difference operators. Our descrip-tor, termed DWKS, thus combines the power and flexibility of local descriptors with the information of shape distortion present in shape difference operators, which, as we demon-strate below, makes it applicable in partial cross-collection matching scenarios. We also exploit recent advances in con-structing robust operators [41] to enable accurate and effi-cient matching across shapes represented as both meshes and point clouds.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows: 1. we introduce a novel pointwise descriptor that reflects de-formation around a point within a collection, 2. we demon-strate how spectral methods, and specifically the WKS de-sciptors can be extended beyond the Laplacian to shape difference operators, and 3. we demonstrate how difficult matching scenarios with partiality and symmetry ambigu-ity, on both point clouds and meshes can strongly benefit from our descriptor without landmarks or neural network training. 2.