Abstract
Most of the state-of-the-art action recognition methods focus on offline learning, where the samples of all types of actions need to be provided at once. Here, we address continual learning of action recognition, where various types of new actions are continuously learned over time.
This task is quite challenging, owing to the catastrophic for-getting problem stemming from the discrepancies between the previously learned actions and current new actions to be learned. Therefore, we propose Else-Net, a novel Elastic
Semantic Network with multiple learning blocks to learn diversified human actions over time. Specifically, our Else-Net is able to automatically search and update the most the current new action, or relevant learning blocks w.r.t. explore new blocks to store new knowledge, preserving the unmatched ones to retain the knowledge of previously learned actions and alleviates forgetting when learning new actions. Moreover, even though different human actions may vary to a large extent as a whole, their local body parts can still share many homogeneous features. Inspired by this, our proposed Else-Net mines the shared knowledge of the decomposed human body parts from different actions, which benefits continual learning of actions. Experiments show that the proposed approach enables effective contin-ual action recognition and achieves promising performance on two large-scale action recognition datasets. 1.

Introduction
Skeleton-based human action recognition has been at-tracting increasing attention in recent years because of its research significance [5, 32, 29] and relevance to a wide range of applications, e.g., human-robot interaction, self-driving vehicles, and security surveillance [34, 6]. Most of the existing works [7, 30, 38, 20, 13, 17, 26] mainly
*Corresponding Author. focus on using offline learning strategies to train the action recognition models, i.e., all training action sequences need to be provided at once when training the fixed-structure models. However, the recognition models operating in the real world may be exposed to continuous streams of new in-formation, i.e., new unseen actions may continuously come in. For instance, in the real-world human-robot interaction scenario, the robot operates under open-set and can always encounter new human interactions. Given an unseen human interaction, retraining the robot on all previously observed interactions hinders the robot from conducting efficient learning and providing a timely response. In this case, the recognition models must learn from the non-stationary data distributions. However, continual learning of human action recognition under non-stationary conditions is challenging due to the catastrophic forgetting problem [23], which refers to the tendency that the recognition models forget the previously learned knowledge upon learning new unseen actions.
On the other hand, humans have an extraordinary capac-ity to learn continually from the external environment and their historical experience over their lifespan without the catastrophic forgetting problem, i.e., they excel at continu-ally acquiring and accumulating new knowledge and skills.
This is because human brains can learn new knowledge by searching and consolidating the most relevant memories in multiple neocortex regions or establishing new memories by activating new neocortex regions [9, 22]. In this way, human brains can turn new knowledge into long-term mem-ories to avoid forgetting. Moreover, when learning each new knowledge, humans do not need to be retrained with all the historical information to avoid the forgetting of the old knowledge.
In this paper, we aim to investigate a brain-inspired model that can approach human intelligence for continual human action recognition, i.e., the model needs to effec-tively accumulate new knowledge from actions over time
while retaining the previously learned knowledge. More specifically, we propose a novel Elastic Semantic Network (Else-Net) that consists of multiple layers of elastic units.
Each elastic unit comprises several learning blocks storing diversified knowledge from different human actions, with a switch block to select the most relevant block. Unlike existing offline learning approaches [7, 37] that update the parameters of the fixed-structure network during learning, our Else-Net has the capabilities in dynamically and flexibly searching and activating only the most relevant learning block in each Elastic Unit. It can also explore new learning blocks to store new knowledge, given the current input information. Conditioning on the selected learning blocks, our Else-Net constructs a pathway that best matches the cur-rent new human action. Since we select the learning blocks that are most relevant to the new actions for parameter updating, our network is able to learn the newly-incoming actions very effectively. Meanwhile, since the parameters of the non-selected (irrelevant) blocks are frozen, our model also preserves the knowledge of previously learned actions at the same time.
However, it can be difficult to find a matched relevant pathway for newly-incoming human actions at a holistic level, as unseen human actions may differ significantly from previously learned actions as a whole. Regardless of the overall human body, we observe that the current new action may share homogeneous features with the previously learned actions at the decomposed semantic body-part level, which benefits the searching for the relevant blocks.
In-spired by this, we exploit the homogeneity by designing our Else-Net with multiple semantic branches for the de-composed multiple body parts, where each semantic branch is comprised of several layers of elastic units. Thus our network searches and activates the best-matched pathway for each semantic body part separately. 2.