Abstract
Person search suffers from the conflicting objectives of commonness and uniqueness between the person detection and re-identification tasks that make the end-to-end train-ing of person search networks difficult. In this paper, we propose a trident network for person search that performs detection, re-identification, and part classification together.
We also devise a novel end-to-end training method using adaptive gradient weighting that controls the flow of back-propagated gradients through the re-identification and part classification networks according to the quality of the per-son detection. The proposed method not only prevents the over-fitting but encourages to exploit fine-grained features by incorporating the part classification branch into the per-son search framework. Experimental results on the CUHK-SYSU and PRW datasets demonstrate that the proposed method achieves the best performance among the state-of-the-art end-to-end person search methods. 1.

Introduction
Person search has drawn considerable attention recently with the increasing demand for person re-identification in real world images. The conventional methods of person re-identification consider a set of cropped person images and find the person images matching to a given query person.
On the other hand, the person search methods directly find the target persons from a set of scene images where multi-ple persons may appear in a single image. Therefore, per-son search has a strong potential to be applied to numerous practical applications. For example, it can be used to de-ploy visual surveillance systems to monitor and trace the suspects from video sequences. Also, it can be applied to augmented reality systems with mobile camera devices that provide useful visual information for social entertainment.
The person search is an integrated task of person detec-tion and re-identification. According to the relationship be-tween these two sub-tasks, the existing person search meth-ods are classified into two categories: end-to-end frame-(a) (b)
Figure 1: The concept of adaptive training for the proposed person search network. (a) Conventional end-to-end train-ing. (b) The proposed end-to-end training. work [21, 7, 18, 22, 3, 2, 24, 16, 5, 14, 13, 1] and two-step framework [23, 4, 12, 9, 19, 8]. The end-to-end meth-ods share the features for detection and re-identification and train the networks to minimize both the detection and re-identification losses simultaneously. While the person detection tries to model the common features of persons distinct from the background, the re-identification pursues unique features to recognize the identity of each person. It is, therefore, one of the main challenges in person search to jointly train the detection and re-identification networks by coordinating these two inconsistent objectives. On the other hand, the two-step methods explicitly divide the per-son search task into detection and re-identification, and train the corresponding two sub-networks independently. Thus, the two-step networks are relatively easy to be trained, but at the same time, suffer from the difficulty of reflecting the re-identification results to detection.
In this paper, we propose an end-to-end person search network and its adaptive training algorithm for task-consistency between person detection and re-identification.
While the objectives conflict between detection and re-the re-identification performance depends identification,
on the detection results. We devise an adaptive gradient weighting function (AGWF) that controls the flow of the back-propagated gradients through the re-identification net-work according to the quality of detection results. For ex-ample, when the detection network is in an early phase of training or outputs unexpected erroneous proposals, the propagation of gradients to update the parameters of re-identification network is suppressed. Moreover, we addi-tionally employ a part classification network that refines the features of local regions in person proposals to pre-vent the shared features from being biased to a specific task and/or redundant training data. Figure 1 shows the proposed trident network composed of detection, re-identification, and part classification branches, and its end-to-end train-ing where the detection confidence is reflected to the loss computation of the re-identification and part classification networks via AGWF.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.
• We proposed an end-to-end trident person search net-work composed of detection, re-identification, and part classification branches to generalize the shared fea-tures and alleviate the overfitting during training.
• We devised an adaptive gradient propagation scheme for end-to-end training that controls the gradient flow through the re-identification and part classification branches according to the detection confidence.
• We showed that the proposed method provides the best performance among the existing state-of-the-art end-to-end person search methods on widely used bench-mark datasets of CUHK-SYSU and PRW. 2.