Abstract
Glass-like objects such as windows, bottles, and mirrors exist widely in the real world. Sensing these objects has many applications, including robot navigation and grasp-ing. However, this task is very challenging due to the ar-bitrary scenes behind glass-like objects. This paper aims to solve the glass-like object segmentation problem via en-hanced boundary learning. In particular, we ﬁrst propose a novel reﬁned differential module that outputs ﬁner bound-ary cues. We then introduce an edge-aware point-based graph convolution network module to model the global shape along the boundary. We use these two modules to de-sign a decoder that generates accurate and clean segmen-tation results, especially on the object contours. Both mod-ules are lightweight and effective: they can be embedded into various segmentation models. In extensive experiments on three recent glass-like object segmentation datasets, in-cluding Trans10k, MSD, and GDD, our approach estab-lishes new state-of-the-art results. We also illustrate the strong generalization properties of our method on three generic segmentation datasets, including Cityscapes, BDD, and COCO Stuff. Code and models will be available for further research. 1.

Introduction
Glass-like objects widely exist in the real world: bottles, windows, and mirrors are made of glass. They are mostly transparent, often amorphous solid. Sensing these objects is useful for many applications. For example, robots need to avoid fragile objects (e.g., glasses, vases, and mirrors) during their navigation. These objects differ from others in that: (1) they do not have a ﬁxed pattern, their shape often vary, (2) because of their transparent nature, they are mostly
∗Equal Contribution. Corresponding to: LuBin Weng, Guangliang
Cheng
Figure 1: Illustration of glass-like object segmentation. Row one gives the input image and ground truth. Row two shows the com-parison results on the boundary. Row three compares the ﬁnal seg-mentation results. Our method (EBLNet) works the best among them [24, 55]. confounded with the surrounding background, the appear-ance of their inner region varying according to the scene, (3) not all glass regions are salient, sometimes there are some occlusions or reﬂections on it. These problems make such glass-like object segmentation a difﬁcult task. Current state-of-the-art semantic segmentation models [66, 7, 13] and salient object detection methods [35, 63] are signiﬁcantly challenged. Similarly, though previous works on boundary detection [56, 62, 11] achieve remarkable results on tradi-tional benchmarks [47, 1], they can not work well on glass-like object scenarios due to the confounding appearance of the object’s inner and outer parts. Fig. 1 illustrates a com-plex example for glass segmentation.
To address the above issues, the very ﬁrst step is to
construct large-scale datasets [40, 58, 55]. From these datasets, the task is cast as a two-class semantic segmenta-tion problem, where glass-like objects are foreground and the rest is background. Based on these newly proposed datasets, state-of-the-art methods of both semantic segmen-tation [13, 66, 7] and salient object detection [35, 53] ob-tain unsatisfactory results. For example, DeeplabV3+ (se-mantic segmentation method) [7] and EGNet (salient ob-ject detection method) [67] only get 84.2 and 85.0 mIoU on
GDD [40] test set. Very few dedicated methods to solve this challenging task have been introduced so far [40, 55, 58].
GDNet [40] proposes to use multiple well-designed large-ﬁeld contextual feature integration to enhance the context representation for modeling glass object context. Mirror-Net [58] uses a contextual contrasted feature extraction module for mirror detection. In contrast, Translab [55] pro-poses to use boundary-aware information to improve the segmentation performance. However, the ﬁrst two [58, 40] bring too much comparison and context information, which is not very helpful. The last one ignores the pixel-wised re-lationship on the boundary, limiting the generality of learn-ing objects with various shapes.
When humans locate and recognize the glass-like object, one crucial cue is the entire boundary of such object. In-stead, comparing the inner object appearance and its sur-rounding background used in MirrorNet and GDNet cannot help much to segment since they are mainly confounded.
To reduce the inﬂuence of complex inner parts and get accurate boundary prediction, motivated by differential edge detection and morphological processing [12, 43], we propose a novel and efﬁcient module named Reﬁned Dif-ferential Module (RDM). RDM works in a coarse-to-ﬁne manner with residual learning. Speciﬁcally, rather than sim-ply predict the edge of objects with edge supervision, we also supervise the non-edge part following the same spirit of dilation operation in morphological processing [46] to eliminate noise brought by the inner part and background.
This process helps generate smoother non-edge features.
Then the thinner and more accurate edge features can be generated by subtracting the non-edge features from the whole features.
In order to use the precise edge predic-tion to enhance global feature learning around the edge then improve the ﬁnal prediction, we further propose an efﬁ-cient edge-aware Point-based Graph convolution network
Module (PGM). In network design, our modules can be plugged into many semantic segmentation methods. Take
DeeplabV3+ [7] as an example, our modules can be inserted behind the ASPP module. Finally, we propose a joint loss function to simultaneously supervise the edge part, non-edge part, and ﬁnal segmentation result.
Quantitatively, our approach achieves a signiﬁcant gain in performance w.r.t. previous work [24, 55] (around 3%-5% in mIoU), on three recent proposed glass-like ob-ject segmentation datasets (Trans10k [55], GDD [40], and
MSD [58]), and hence achieves new state-of-the-art results.
Visually, our method detects more accurate boundaries, re-sulting in a more precise segmentation result (see Fig. 1).
This backs our original motivation that ﬁner boundary pre-diction leads to more reﬁned segmentation.
We further verify the generalization performance of our model in Sec. 4.4 via two different setting, one of them car-ries out the experiments on another three general segmen-tation datasets, including CityScapes [10], BDD [60], and
COCO Stuff [4].
Our main contributions are three-fold:
• We analyze some existing methods, like DANet [13],
Trans10k [55], and GDNet [40] then identify their drawbacks for glass-like object segmentation task.
• We propose a Reﬁned Differential Module (RDM) to generate precise edge and an efﬁcient Point-based
Graph convolution network Module (PGM) for global edge feature learning. Then a joint loss function is pro-posed to supervise the whole model.
• Extensive experiments and analyses indicate the effec-tiveness and generalization of our model. We achieve the state-of-the-art results on three challenging recent proposed glass-like object segmentation benchmarks. 2.