Abstract
In this paper, we proposed EPP-MVSNet, a novel deep learning network for 3D reconstruction from multi-view stereo (MVS). EPP-MVSNet can accurately aggregate features at high resolution to a limited cost volume with an optimal depth range, thus, leads to effective and efﬁcient 3D construction. Distinct from existing works which measure feature cost at discrete positions which affects the 3D reconstruction accuracy, EPP-MVSNet introduces an epipolar-assembling-based kernel that operates on adaptive intervals along epipolar lines for making full use of the image resolution. Further, we introduce an entropy-based reﬁning strategy where the cost volume describes the space geometry with the little redundancy. Moreover, we design a light-weighted network with Pseudo-3D convolutions integrated to achieve high accuracy and efﬁciency. We have conducted extensive experiments on challenging datasets Tanks & Temples(TNT), ETH3D and DTU. As a result, we achieve promising results on all datasets and the highest F-Score on the online TNT intermediate benchmark. Code is available at https:
//gitee.com/mindspore/mindspore/tree/m aster/model_zoo/research/cv/eppmvsnet. 1.

Introduction
Dense 3D reconstruction from multi-view stereo (MVS) is a fundamental problem that has been studied for decades, where dense correspondences are computed among multi-ple images and used to determine the dense geometry. Typ-ically, correspondences can be established for each patch of a reference image by searching its optimal matching patch among target images [2]. Alternatively, [10] computes mat-*Equal contribution.
†Corresponding author. (a) Mean F-score (b) Run-time and memory
Figure 1. Comparison between the proposed EPP-MVSNet and state-of-the-art learning-based multi-view stereo methods [9, 19, 27] on reconstruction quality in (a) and run-time and memory re-quirement in (b) with input images resolution of 1920×1056 on
Tanks & Temples dataset [13]. ching costs by exhaustively sampling pixels on the epipolar lines and storing them into a cost volume, which is used to determine the ﬁnal depth map. However, both directions en-counter the challenge on how to estimate depth accurately and efﬁciently, especially in the real world scenarios ﬁlled with noises and smooth texture, existing solutions require high computation cost, but often achieve unsatisfactory re-construction quality. While recent deep learning-based so-lutions [9, 22] address these issues and further enhance re-construction quality, they still suffer from high memory and computation requirement for constructing and regularizing cost volumes, which make them unable to make fully usage of high resolution images.
In this paper, we aim at designing a deep neural network to fully utilize the information of high resolution images.
Though high-resolution cost volume is memory consum-ing, patch-match-based methods can overcome this issue by searching for the minimum cost rather than storing all the cost at the given image resolution. We further develop this idea and propose an epipolar-assembling module that assembles matching cost along the epipolar line. Specif-ically, our epipolar-assembling module constructs a com-pact cost volume by assembling densely interpolated fea-tures and further reducing the volume size by adaptive pool-ing. Rather than increasing the resolution, our module as-sembles high-resolution cost volume into a coarse volume resolution and only introduces an one-dimensional aggre-gation and pooling complexity. Furthermore, we introduce an entropy-based reﬁning strategy for reducing redundancy and information loss of the constructed ﬁne cost volume.
In proposed deep learning model, the most expensive operator is 3D convolution, thus, in this work, we fur-ther reduce the cost by replacing a 3D convolution with a Pseudo-3D convolution and developing a light-weighted structure for cost volume regularization. Our experiments show that such change does not hurt reconstruction accu-racy but dramatically improves learning and inference ef-ﬁciency. We evaluate the EPP-MVSNet on Tanks & Tem-ples(TNT) [13], ETH3D [17] and DTU [1] dataset and show that the proposed network achieve promising performance on both reconstruction quality and efﬁciency aspects. Abla-tion study is further conducted for exhibiting advantageous effect brought by each key modules proposed.
To summarize, our major contributions are listed as fol-lows:
• We introduce an epipolar-assembling module for as-sembling high-resolution information into cost vol-umes with limited size.
• We propose an entropy-based process that adjusts depth range for reducing redundancy and information loss.
• We apply a light-weighted 3D regularization network which dramatically increases learning and inference efﬁciency.
• We have conducted extensive experiments to show that
EPP-MVSNet outperforms state-of-the-art methods in
TNT and ETH3D datasets with respect to effectiveness and efﬁciency. 2.