Abstract
Have you ever looked at a painting and wondered what is the story behind it? This work presents a framework to bring art closer to people by generating comprehensive descriptions of ﬁne-art paintings. Generating informative descriptions for artworks, however, is extremely challeng-ing, as it requires to 1) describe multiple aspects of the im-age such as its style, content, or composition, and 2) pro-vide background and contextual knowledge about the artist, their inﬂuences, or the historical period. To address these challenges, we introduce a multi-topic and knowledgeable art description framework, which modules the generated sentences according to three artistic topics and, addition-ally, enhances each description with external knowledge.
The framework is validated through an exhaustive analy-sis, both quantitative and qualitative, as well as a compar-ative human evaluation, demonstrating outstanding results in terms of both topic diversity and information veracity. 1.

Introduction
For the general public, art tends to be considered as a mysterious and remote discipline that requires a lot of study to be fully appreciated. In the last few years, many efforts have been made to apply artiﬁcial intelligence technologies to the domain of art to make it more accessible [16]. Thanks to the large-scale digitisation of artworks from collections all over the world [22, 66, 49, 61], computer vision tech-niques have been widely adopted to address different art-related problems [30, 45, 11, 20, 44, 34, 8, 59, 18, 69].
Most of the existing work in the ﬁeld is focused on the automatic analysis of paintings, addressing problems such as attribute prediction [45, 59], content analysis [11, 21] or style identiﬁcation [29, 54, 30]. However, there is still an absence of research that conveys in-depth and comprehen-sive information of artworks for the general public. In other words, most previous work only allows people to under-*Work done during a remote internship at Osaka University.
Figure 1. Art description generation. Comparison between stan-dard image captioning (top) and art image description generation (bottom). Standard image captioning usually generates a single factual natural sentence to describe the content of a real-world im-age, while our art image description contains multiple sentences to explain an artwork from different artistic perspectives. stand a unique aspect of an artwork by providing a single tag, usually associated with either its style or its content.
However, a real understanding of art is much more com-plex than being able to successfully categorize each piece into a set of pre-deﬁned tags. The intricate relationships be-tween the content, form, and context of each artwork are not at hand in a simple categorization process. In this work, we take a step forward on the ﬁeld of art understanding and accessibility by proposing to automatically generate rich descriptions of paintings from multiple artistic perspectives.
We propose a multi-topic and knowledgeable art description generation framework that produces detailed explanations about different aspects of paintings. Such a service would facilitate a deeper interaction between the general public and artworks, as well as potentially ease the work of art cu-rators by automatically generating comments of paintings.
Art description generation may be seen as a problem similar to image captioning [64, 12, 1], which aims to nat-urally and factually describe the content of the scene in the image. Compared to conventional image captioning, how-ever, generating descriptions for artworks faces two extra challenges. First, a comprehensive explanation of an art-work requires not only the factual description of its con-tent, but also background knowledge, such as details about its author, the context of the creation process, and so on.
This information is rarely contained in the artwork image it-self. Second, according to art historians [2], an informative description of an artwork should address three main top-ics: content, form, and context. While in standard image captioning only the content is considered, the distinction among different artistic topics requires to handle a more complex language modeling scheme.
To address these challenges, we introduce a multi-topic and knowledgeable art description generation framework that: 1) introduces external knowledge into the description generation process, and 2) proposes a multi-topic language model to describe the different aspects of the painting. The main idea is illustrated in Fig. 1, where an artwork image is used to both generate a description and retrieve related knowledge from an external source. Our framework fol-lows three steps. Firstly, by training a language model, we generate a masked sentence with ﬁllable slots for the con-cepts that require external information to be known, such as artist, date of creation, location, etc. Moreover, the lan-guage model incorporates information about different artis-tic topics so that the masked sentences are generated accord-ing to each topic. Secondly, a knowledge retrieval module is employed to retrieve external information related to the painting from open access databases (e.g. Wikipedia1). Fi-nally, we design a knowledge-ﬁlling module that extracts candidate words from the retrieved knowledge and selects the appropriate concepts for each slot.
In our exhaustive experimental section, including quanti-tative comparisons, qualitative analysis, and human evalua-tion, we show that our framework generates satisfactory art descriptions more accurately and informatively than others.
Overall, our main contributions are:
• We propose the ﬁrst framework for art description gen-eration that creates multi-topic long descriptions of
ﬁne-art paintings. So far, art description generation has been tackled as an image captioning task by only gen-erating short factual sentences about artworks.
• We design a multi-topic language modeling module to generate multi-topic descriptions. Additionally, we an-notate an art description dataset with sentence-topic la-bels based on art historians protocols [2], which we share publicly2 to inspire future work not only in art 1https://www.wikipedia.org 2https://github.com/noagarcia/explain-paintings description but also in general art understanding.
• We leverage a knowledge retriever and train a knowl-edge ﬁlling module as a ﬁll-in-the-blank task to incor-porate art information relevant to each painting. This method can be easily applied to other domains. 2.