Abstract 3D multi-object tracking in LiDAR point clouds is a key ingredient for self-driving vehicles. Existing methods are predominantly based on the tracking-by-detection pipeline and inevitably require a heuristic matching step for the de-tection association. In this paper, we present SimTrack to simplify the hand-crafted tracking paradigm by proposing an end-to-end trainable model for joint detection and track-ing from raw point clouds. Our key design is to predict the
ﬁrst-appear location of each object in a given snippet to get the tracking identity and then update the location based on motion estimation. In the inference, the heuristic matching step can be completely waived by a simple read-off oper-ation. SimTrack integrates the tracked object association, newborn object detection, and dead track killing in a sin-gle uniﬁed model. We conduct extensive evaluations on two large-scale datasets: nuScenes and Waymo Open Dataset.
Experimental results reveal that our simple approach com-pares favorably with the state-of-the-art methods while rul-ing out the heuristic matching rules. 1.

Introduction 3D multi-object tracking is a crucial component in an au-tonomous driving system as it provides pivotal information to facilitate various onboard modules ranging from percep-tion, prediction to planning. LiDAR is the most commonly used sensor that a self-driving vehicle relies on to perceive its surroundings. Thus, tracking in LiDAR point clouds has been attracting increasing interests with the rapid develop-ment of self-driving vehicles in recent years.
Multi-object tracking is a long-standing task in computer vision and has been extensively studied in image sequence domain. Arguably, the tracking-by-detection is the most popular tracking paradigm, which ﬁrst detects objects for each frame and then associates them across frames. These methods have shown promising results and beneﬁted from huge progress in image object detection. They usually for-mulate the association step as a bipartite matching problem.
Most existing works therefore focus on better deﬁning the
*Correspondence to xiaodong@qcraft.ai
Figure 1: An overview of the tracking-by-detection pipeline and our approach. (a) performs 3D object detection in each point cloud and then match detected objects through an as-sociation step, which involves complex heuristic rules. (b) reads-off tracking identities and updates object locations us-ing estimated motion, and at the same time manages new-born and dead tracks. Our model handles the three cases in a single forward pass without requiring heuristic matching. afﬁnity matrix between tracked objects and new detections.
In the matching criteria design, the motion [2] and appear-ance [32] are widely adopted as the association cues.
For 3D multi-object tracking with LiDAR, the tracking-by-detection pipeline also plays the dominant role [6, 27].
Accordingly, in order to obtain the ﬁnal tracking result, cur-rent methods inevitably require a heuristic matching step to link detected objects over time in a separate stage. There exists numerous hand-crafted rules when performing such a step. As compared in the supplementary material, differ-ent matching criteria and corresponding threshold for each speciﬁc object class substantially impact the ﬁnal tracking performance. This also happens in the track life manage-ment, which is used to handle new-born objects and dead tracks. It is a common practice for these methods to initial-ize a track only when an object continuously presents for a certain number of frames in order to ﬁlter out false de-tections, and keep disappeared objects for several frames to
tackle occlusion. Unfortunately, all these heuristic rules are not trainable and highly depend on their hyper-parameters that demand huge efforts to tune. What is worse, such rules and hyper-parameters are often data and model dependent, making it hard to generalize and laborious to re-tune when applying to new scenarios.
The main reason for the requirement of an additional heuristic matching step is the lack of connection between frames in conducting object detection. Recently, some methods [18, 31] estimate velocity or predict the location of an object in consecutive frames to provide such a con-nection across frames. However, they merely treat the fore-casted detections as a bridge for object matching instead of using them as the ﬁnal tracking output. Moreover, they only take into account the location relationship of objects between frames, without modeling the conﬁdence for the association. So the conﬁdence score only reﬂects the detec-tion conﬁdence in a single frame. As a result, these methods are often prone to spurious detections and have to manually decide the number of frames to keep for the purpose of deal-ing with occluded objects. Another issue lies in how to pro-cess newborn objects in an online tracking system. Existing methods [1, 18] re-detect all objects in the current frame so that matching is still in need to differentiate the newborn objects from the tracked ones.
In light of the above observation, we present SimTrack: a simple model for 3D multi-object tracking in point clouds.
We simplify the existing hand-crafted tracking algorithms without requiring the heuristic matching step. Our approach is ﬂexible to build upon the commonly used pillar or voxel based 3D object detection networks [9, 36]. We propose a novel hybrid-time centerness map, which represents objects by their ﬁrst-appear locations within the given input period.
Based on this map, we can directly link current detections to previous tracked objects without the need for additional matching. Since this map formulates the detection and as-sociation of an object at the same time, our model is able to inherently provide the association conﬁdence between frames. Also, we introduce a motion updating branch to es-timate the motion of tracked objects in order to update from their ﬁrst-appear locations to the current positions. For the new-born objects and dead tracks, they can be determined simply by conﬁdence thresholding as regular detections on the same map, thus removing the manual track life man-agement too. As illustrated in Figure 1, our model elimi-nates the heurstic matching step, and uniﬁes the tracked ob-ject linking, new-born object detection as well as dead track killing in a single forward pass.
To our knowledge, this work provides the ﬁrst learning paradigm that is able to get rid of the heuristic matching step for 3D multi-object tracking in point clouds, and there-fore, remarkably simpliﬁes the whole tracking system. We introduce a novel end-to-end trainable model for joint de-tection and tracking through a hybrid-time centerness map and a motion updating branch. Experimental results reveal that this simple approach compares favorably to the exist-ing methods. Our code and model will be made available at https://github.com/qcraftai/simtrack. 2.