Abstract
The minimum graph cut and minimum s-t-cut problems are important primitives in the modeling of combinatorial problems in computer science, including in computer vision and machine learning. Some of the most efﬁcient algorithms for ﬁnding global minimum cuts are randomized algorithms based on Karger’s groundbreaking contraction algorithm.
Here, we study whether Karger’s algorithm can be success-fully generalized to other cut problems. We ﬁrst prove that a wide class of natural generalizations of Karger’s algorithm cannot efﬁciently solve the s-t-mincut or the normalized cut problem to optimality. However, we then present a simple new algorithm for seeded segmentation / graph-based semi-supervised learning that is closely based on Karger’s orig-inal algorithm, showing that for these problems, extensions of Karger’s algorithm can be useful. The new algorithm has linear asymptotic runtime and yields a potential that can be interpreted as the posterior probability of a sample belong-ing to a given seed / class. We clarify its relation to the random walker algorithm / harmonic energy minimization in terms of distributions over spanning forests. On classi-cal problems from seeded image segmentation and graph-based semi-supervised learning on image data, the method performs at least as well as the random walker / harmonic energy minimization / Gaussian processes. 1.

Introduction
Minimum graph cuts have been applied to machine learning problems for a long time. They have been used in natural language processing [33] and especially in computer vision, for example in segmentation [39, 34, 2], restora-tion [13], and energy minimization more generally [21].
Nowadays, they still form an important part of many deep learning pipelines, for example for segmentation [41, 28, 29, 25, 26], image classiﬁcation [31], and recently also neu-ral style transfer [42].
For ﬁnding global minimum cuts (deﬁned together with all other terminology in Section 2), Karger’s contraction al-gorithm [16, 19] started a wave of randomized algorithms solving this problem efﬁciently [17, 8, 10, 27].
Thanks to these randomized algorithms, global mincuts can, somewhat surprisingly, be found more efﬁciently than s-t-mincuts. An interesting question is therefore to what extent randomized algorithms can be applied to other graph cut problems, and in particular whether Karger’s algorithm can be fruitfully extended. An especially important cut problem are s-t-mincuts. While approximating them is pos-sible in nearly linear time in the number of edges [20, 35] and has also been studied using randomized algorithms based on graph sparsiﬁcation [1], it is to our knowledge still an open question whether Karger’s algorithm can be modi-ﬁed to efﬁciently ﬁnd s-t-mincuts.
In Section 3, we give a deﬁnitive answer to this ques-tion by proving that a large class of extensions of Karger’s contraction algorithm can in general not exactly solve the s-t-mincut problem efﬁciently. Our result also applies to the normalized cut problem [36], which, like the s-t-mincut, plays an important role in image segmentation.
However, extensions of Karger’s algorithm can still be
In Section 4, we useful if applied in the right way. show how a straightforward extension of Karger’s algorithm can be used successfully for seeded segmentation / semi-supervised learning tasks. We interpret this extension as a forest sampling method and observe its similarities to the random walker algorithm [11] for seeded graph segmen-tation. In semi-supervised learning, the same algorithm is known as harmonic energy minimization [43] or Gaussian
Processes, so the same observations apply.
The main contribution of this paper is purely concep-tual. Still, in Section 5 we show in two classical experi-ments that the proposed algorithm compares well against the random walker / harmonic energy minimization, per-haps the most inﬂuential algorithm in seeded segmentation
/ semi-supervised learning to date. Since our method has an asymptotic time complexity of only O(m) on a graph
with m edges, it can be seen as an efﬁcient alternative to the random walker algorithm / harmonic energy minimization, while also giving a probabilistic output.