Abstract
We introduce a parallel version of the Quadratic Pseudo-Boolean Optimization (QPBO) algorithm for solving binary optimization tasks, such as image segmentation. The origi-nal QPBO implementation by Kolmogorov and Rother relies on the Boykov-Kolmogorov (BK) maxflow/mincut algorithm and performs well for many image analysis tasks. However, the serial nature of their QPBO algorithm results in poor utilization of modern hardware. By redesigning the QPBO algorithm to work with parallel maxflow/mincut algorithms, we significantly reduce solve time of large optimization tasks.
We compare our parallel QPBO implementation to other state-of-the-art solvers and benchmark them on two large segmentation tasks and a substantial set of small segmenta-tion tasks. The results show that our parallel QPBO algo-rithm is over 20 times faster than the serial QPBO algorithm on the large tasks and over three times faster for the majority of the small tasks. Although we focus on image segmentation, our algorithm is generic and can be used for any QPBO problem. Our implementation and experimental results are available at DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.5201620 1.

Introduction
Computational parallelism is essential to the performance and thereby the usefulness of many image segmentation al-gorithms. The best example is perhaps deep learning, which owes much of its success to highly efficient parallel imple-mentations of the matrix operations used during both training and inference. However, not all algorithms used in computer vision rely on easily parallelizable matrix operations.
Graph cut algorithms are popular for solving binary op-timization problems in image analysis, due to their speed and guarantee of optimality. Thus, they provide efficient solutions to a variety of computer vision problems – on their own [8, 9, 11, 16, 23, 26, 33, 35], or in combination with other methods [18, 29, 30]. While some popular graph cut algorithms have been parallelized [11, 36, 41, 43], other al-gorithms have remained serial, which severely limits their ability to utilize modern hardware. One example is the
Quadratic Pseudo-Boolean Optimization (QPBO) algorithm
[7, 19, 33, 39], which allows non-submodular energy terms, making it particularly useful for instance segmentation. In-stance segmentation without training data is common in microscopy and material science, where manually labeling large volumetric datasets can be highly impractical. Often, the input needed for segmentation with QPBO can be ob-tained much easier.
In this paper, we introduce the first parallel QPBO (P-QPBO) algorithm. Our goal is to provide an efficient and scalable algorithm that can take advantage of modern multi-core processors. With our P-QPBO algorithm, results can be obtained over an order of magnitude faster than with previous serial methods, and the scale of the tasks can be increased significantly. It enables us to segment a volume with hundreds of interacting 3D objects in minutes based on limited user input and no training data. Although we only demonstrate the advantage of P-QPBO for image segmenta-tion, P-QPBO can be used for any QPBO problem.
This work focuses on our parallel algorithm and its time and memory efficiency on image segmentation tasks. Thus, the formulation of suitable energy functions for specific computer vision tasks is outside the scope of this paper. 1.1.