Abstract
We present a novel surface convolution operator acting on vector fields that is based on a simple observation: in-stead of combining neighboring features with respect to a single coordinate parameterization defined at a given point, we have every neighbor describe the position of the point within its own coordinate frame. This formulation com-bines intrinsic spatial convolution with parallel transport in a scattering operation while placing no constraints on the filters themselves, providing a definition of convolution that commutes with the action of isometries, has increased de-scriptive potential, and is robust to noise and other nuisance factors. The result is a rich notion of convolution which we call field convolution, well-suited for CNNs on surfaces.
Field convolutions are flexible, straight-forward to incor-porate into surface learning frameworks, and their highly discriminating nature has cascading effects throughout the learning pipeline. Using simple networks constructed from residual field convolution blocks, we achieve state-of-the-art results on standard benchmarks in fundamental geome-try processing tasks, such as shape classification, segmen-tation, correspondence, and sparse matching. 1.

Introduction
The advent of deep learning in imaging, vision, and graphics has coincided with the development of numerous techniques for the analysis and processing of curved sur-faces based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs). The challenge in reproducing the success of CNNs on surfaces is that classical notions of convolution and correlation in Eu-clidean spaces cannot simply be transposed onto curved do-mains. Unlike images, points on a surface have no canonical orientation, without which simple operations fundamental to the spatial propagation of information, such as moving dot products, cannot be computed in a repeatable manner.
Geometric deep learning is a young field, and many successful methods can be broadly categorized in relation to two emerging paradigms characterized by specific ap-proaches to convolution: diffusive propagation and equiv-Figure 1. Prior approaches define patch-based convolution opera-tors as gathering operations (left), which are sensitive to noise or disruptions in the local coordinate system. Field convolution is a scattering operation and is robust under perturbations as it does not rely on a single coordinate system to aggregate features. ariant propagation. Diffusive approaches closely inter-twine convolution operations with heat diffusion on man-ifolds wherein filters represented by anisotropic heat ker-nels or Gaussians are used to propagate scalar features
[35, 6, 5, 39, 31, 47]. In contrast, equivariant convolutions distribute vector or tensor features that transform with local coordinate systems [41, 55, 46, 7, 9, 61, 62].
Critically, virtually all state-of-the-art approaches sac-rifice filter descriptiveness to define a notion of convolu-tion that does not depend on the choice of local coordinate frames. Gaussian filters can facilitate efficient evaluations in the spectral domain but are individually undiscriminat-ing. Extensions to anisotropic filtering mitigate these lim-itations by extending the class of filters that can be used.
However, this requires defining a frame field over the sur-face – itself a hard problem.
Equivariant approaches have the potential to provide ex-pressive notions of convolution on surfaces due to the en-coding of geometric information in the transport of tangent vector features. However, equivariance of the response is almost universally achieved by placing constraints on the filters themselves [41, 42, 8, 9, 25, 61], limiting descrip-tiveness and necessitating complex architectures to support the algebraic relationships between kernels. Furthermore, these regimes formulate spatial propagation as a gathering operation, analogous to correlations on Euclidean domains; features are weighted based on their position relative to a coordinate frame defined at a single point (Figure 1, left),
making them sensitive to inconsistencies or disruptions in local parameterizations .
In this paper we present a novel convolution operator act-ing on vector fields. Our method defines the value of the convolution at a point p using a simple observation: instead of combining neighboring features by parameterizing each neighbor qi with respect to a coordinate frame defined at p, each neighbor qi parametrizes p within its own coordinate frames (Figure 1, right). This formulation combines intrin-sic spatial weighting with parallel transport while placing no constraints on the filters themselves, providing a defini-tion of convolution that commutes with the action of isome-tries and has increased descriptive potential. In addition, as a scattering operation, it is less sensitive to noise and other nuisance factors as it does not rely on a single coordinate system about each point to aggregate features. The result is a rich notion of convolution which we call field convolution (FC), well-suited for CNNs on surfaces.
Field convolutions are flexible and straight-forward to incorporate into surface learning frameworks. Their highly discriminating nature has cascading effects throughout the learning pipeline, allowing us to achieve state-of-the-art results on standard benchmarks in applications including shape classification, segmentation, correspondence, and sparse matching. All code and evaluations are publicly available at github.com/twmitchel/FieldConv. 2.