Abstract
We introduce a bottom-up model for simultaneously find-ing many boundary elements in an image, including con-tours, corners and junctions. The model explains boundary shape in each small patch using a ‘generalized M -junction’ comprising M angles and a freely-moving vertex. Images are analyzed using non-convex optimization to coopera-tively find M + 2 junction values at every location, with spatial consistency being enforced by a novel regularizer that reduces curvature while preserving corners and junc-tions. The resulting ‘field of junctions’ is simultaneously a contour detector, corner/junction detector, and boundary-aware smoothing of regional appearance. Notably, its uni-fied analysis of contours, corners, junctions and uniform re-gions allows it to succeed at high noise levels, where other methods for segmentation and boundary detection fail. 1.

Introduction
Identifying boundaries is fundamental to vision, and be-ing able to do it from the bottom up is helpful because vision systems are not always familiar with the objects and scenes they encounter. The essence of boundaries is easy to articu-late: They are predominantly smooth and curvilinear; they include a small but important set of zero-dimensional events like corners and junctions; and in between boundaries, re-gional appearance is homogeneous in some sense.
Yet, despite this succinct description, extracting bound-aries that include all of these elements and exploit their in-terdependence has proven difficult. After decades of work on various subsets of contour detection, corner detection, junction detection, and segmentation, the community is still searching for comprehensive and reliable solutions. Even deep encoder-decoder CNNs, which can be tuned to ex-ploit many kinds of local and non-local patterns in a dataset, struggle to localize boundaries with precision, motivating an ongoing search for architectural innovations like skip connections, gated convolutions, bilateral regularization, multi-scale supervision, kernel predictors, and so on.
We introduce a bottom-up model that precisely dis-cerns complete boundary structure—contours, corners, and junctions—all at the same time (see Figures 1 & 2). It does this by fitting a non-linear representation to each small im-age patch, with M + 2 values that explain the patch as being uniform or containing an edge, thin bar, corner, or 1
Input gPb [3]
L0 [34], ASJ [36] BM3D [9]→gPb BM3D→L0,ASJ
Ours
Figure 2: Interpreting boundary structure at high and low SNR (top and bottom). The field of junctions identifies contours (column 6), corners/junctions (circles, column 7) and smooth colors (column 7). It is more resilient to noise than previous methods that are specific to contours, junctions or smoothing, even when they are preceded by optimally-tuned denoising. junction of any degree up to M (see Figure 3). The model encourages consistency between overlapping patches using a new form of spatial regularization that, instead of penal-izing overall curve length or elastica, expresses preference for global boundary maps comprising isolated corners and junctions that are connected by contours with small curva-ture. As far as we know, this is the first time such regular-ization has been achieved in the presence of junctions.
An image is analyzed by solving a non-convex optimiza-tion problem that cooperatively determines M + 2 junction values at every location. This produces a field of junctions: a distilled representation of the contours, corners, junctions and homogeneous regions of an image. It is an intermedi-ate representation that is useful for a variety of tasks, in-cluding contour detection, junction/keypoint detection, and boundary-aware smoothing.
Experimentally, the field of junctions provides unprece-dented resilience to noise. It is repeatable over a wide range of noise levels, including very high noise regimes where other approaches—whether based on denoising, segmenta-tion, contour detection, or junction detection—all tend to fail (see Figures 1 & 2). We attribute this to the form of its regularization and to its unified representation of contours, corners, junctions and uniformity, which allows all of these signals to mutually excite and inhibit during analysis.
We introduce the field of junctions model in Section 3, where we formulate analysis as a non-convex optimization problem. We describe how the model can be used for both single-channel and multi-channel images, and how it in-cludes a parameter controlling the scale of its output. The following Section 4 is the heart of the paper: It introduces the optimization techniques that allow analysis to succeed.
In particular, we present a greedy algorithm for initializ-ing each patch’s junction parameters that has convergence guarantees under certain conditions, and is very effective in practice even when they do not hold. In Section 5 we apply the field of junctions to contour, corner, and junc-tion detection, showing that it provides novel regularization capabilities and repeatable performance across many noise levels. Extended versions of our figures, generalizations of the model, additional results, and a video summary of our paper, are all available in the supplement. 2.