Abstract
Marine debris is severely threatening the marine lives and causing sustained pollution to the whole ecosystem. To prevent the wastes from getting into the ocean, it is helpful to clean up the floating wastes in inland waters using the au-tonomous cleaning devices like unmanned surface vehicles.
The cleaning efficiency relies on a high-accurate and robust object detection system. However, the small size of the tar-get, the strong light reflection over water surface, and the reflection of other objects on bank-side all bring challenges to the vision-based object detection system. To promote the practical application for autonomous floating wastes cleaning, we present FloW†, the first dataset for floating waste detection in inland water areas. The dataset con-sists of an image sub-dataset FloW-Img and a multimodal sub-dataset FloW-RI which contains synchronized millime-ter wave radar data and images. Accurate annotations for images and radar data are provided, supporting float-ing waste detection strategies based on image, radar data, and the fusion of two sensors. We perform several base-line experiments on our dataset, including vision-based and radar-based detection methods. The results show that, the detection accuracy is relatively low and floating waste de-tection still remains a challenging task. 1.

Introduction
In recent years, the marine wastes problem has arisen in-creasing concern of researchers and the general public. The wastes, especially the plastics inundating into the oceans are severely threatening the marine lives and causing sus-tained pollution to the whole ecosystem [24] (as illustrated in Figure 1(a)). However, according to [50], only 15% of the marine wastes are floating over the ocean surface, while 15% remain in the water column and 70% subside on the seafloor. While there are many projects launched to clean the floating marine wastes, it is essential to prevent wastes
*Equal contribution.
†FloW dataset as well as the development tools are publicly available at: https://github.com/ORCA-Uboat/FloW-Dataset. (a) Marine Wastes (b) Inland Water Wastes (c) Cleaning Manually (d) Cleaning Autonomously
Figure 1. Severe water pollution and cleaning methods. from getting into the ocean. Land-based sources, as op-posed to marine-based sources, are considered the dominant input of wastes into oceans [20]. Thus, cleaning floating wastes in inland water areas, such as canals, rivers, lakes, and bays (as illustrated in Figure 1(b)), is a vital approach to slow the growing trend of marine wastes and water pol-lution.
Traditional strategies to cope with the floating wastes in inland waters mainly rely on manpower as shown in Figure 1(c). However, manual cleaning is low-efficient and costly when there are a large amount of floating wastes or the pol-luted water area is pretty broad [48]. What’s more, the po-tential risks like the toxic gas and liquid from the drainage systems [49] and accidental drowning, limit the scenes of manual cleaning. Therefore, efficient autonomous floating waste cleaning methods are in great and urgent demand.
Recently, unmanned surface vehicles (USVs) have at-tracted a lot of attention for their usage in various missions.
In particular, USVs have shown great potential in environ-mental applications, especially the floating waste cleaning
[1, 48] (as shown in Figure 1(d)) since USVs can enter some hard-to-reach areas and operate independently. [17] has done a survey on river plastic pollution capture devices and listed 40 of them for comparison. Compared to some stationary devices, a good cleaning USV can be considered
(a) (c) (b) (d) (a) The floating waste occupies small image area. (b)
Figure 2.
The reflection of other objects makes it difficult to identify the bottle. (c) Harmless floating materials like fallen leaves disturb the visual system. (d) The reflection of strong light makes the plastic cup nearly invisible. as the all-inclusive device that can guide (via booms and targeted driving), remove, contain, and transport the debris on water surfaces [17].
To achieve efficient and reliable autonomous cleaning of
USVs, a real-time and accurate floating waste detection sys-tem is indispensable. With the development of computer vision and deep learning, the data of appearance about the objects provided by the visual system can be better utilized.
Therefore, floating wastes detection relying on visual infor-mation can be the most cost-effective solution.
However, in inland waters, floating wastes like bottles and drink cans are of small size. Most of the floating wastes occupy small image areas, which increases the difficulties of accurate detection. For object detection based on deep neural network, compared to large objects, small objects usually lack appearance information and the high-level fea-tures of small objects are not discriminative, making it hard to distinguish them from the background and achieve ac-curate localization [2, 22]. The accuracy for small object detection is much lower than medium and large object de-tection.
Besides the small size, the complex real-world scenes of inland waters also cause challenges for the vision-based detection methods. For example, the reflections of objects on the bank-side as well as other harmless floating materi-als would disturb the visual detection system. The strong light reflection on the water surface may lead to overex-posed images and make the waste invisible. Examples of the aforementioned problems are shown in Figure 2. There-fore, vision-based floating waste detection remains an unre-solved problem for practical applications.
Complementary sensors can increase the adaptability of autonomous driving system. With the flourishing millime-ter wave circuit technology and advanced signal processing techniques, 77 GHz millimeter wave radar has been widely used in perception system of autonomous driving for detec-tion of objects and obstacles [40]. Compared to camera, radar is more robust to weather and lighting condition, and has the ability to reveal the target in a further range. In ad-dition, radar data informs not only the location but also the
Doppler velocity of the target [38]. For floating waste de-tection, radar provides a complement to image data.
It can be seen that public datasets can spur relevant stud-ies and enable comparability for different strategies. For vision-based object detection, advances have been achieved through exploration of the famous dataset like COCO [28] and PASCAL VOC [11]. To draw attention to the float-ing waste cleaning using USVs in inland waters and help researches on small object detection over water surfaces, we introduce FloW, the first dataset for floating waste de-tection from USVs’ view in inland waters which consists of an image sub-dataset FloW-Image (FloW-Img) and a multimodal sub-dataset FloW-Radar-Img (FloW-RI). The
FloW-Img contains 2,000 images with 5,271 labeled float-ing wastes. Small objects account for more than half of the labeled objects. Beside the annotated images, we also pro-vide 200 independent video sequences consisting of more than 20,000 image frames without annotations to support researches on floating wastes tracking on water surfaces. In addition, one highlight of our dataset is the FloW-RI, which contains 4,000 frames of synchronized and calibrated im-ages and millimeter wave radar data of floating wastes. The
FloW dataset is collected under diverse illumination and wave conditions, containing wastes of various appearances at different ranges and view angles. We evaluate some well-used algorithms on our dataset to illustrate the challenges of floating waste detection over water surface.
This work mainly contributes in following aspects:
• To our knowledge, FloW is the first dataset for floating wastes detection collected from the view of USVs in real-world inland waters under various conditions. The dataset can attract attention to floating waste problems in inland waters and help the development and compa-rability of inland waters floating waste detection algo-rithms.
• More than half of the labeled floating wastes in the im-age sub-dataset FloW-Img are regarded as small ob-jects, which can spur studies on small objects detection over water surface.
• The sub-dataset FloW-RI contains continuous se-quences of synchronized image and millimeter wave radar data with accurate annotations, supporting re-searches on floating waste detection based on radar data and fusion of image and radar data.
• We benchmark some well-used object detection al-gorithms on our dataset to illustrate the problem in vision-based floating waste detection in inland waters. 2.