Abstract
We propose the first learning-based approach for fast moving objects detection. Such objects are highly blurred and move over large distances within one video frame. Fast moving objects are associated with a deblurring and mat-ting problem, also called deblatting. We show that the sep-aration of deblatting into consecutive matting and deblur-ring allows achieving real-time performance, i.e. an order of magnitude speed-up, and thus enabling new classes of application. The proposed method detects fast moving ob-jects as a truncated distance function to the trajectory by learning from synthetic data. For the sharp appearance es-timation and accurate trajectory estimation, we propose a matting and fitting network that estimates the blurred ap-pearance without background, followed by an energy min-imization based deblurring. The state-of-the-art methods are outperformed in terms of recall, precision, trajectory estimation, and sharp appearance reconstruction. Com-pared to other methods, such as deblatting, the inference is of several orders of magnitude faster and allows appli-cations such as real-time fast moving object detection and retrieval in large video collections. 1.

Introduction
Fast moving objects (FMOs) are objects that look signif-icantly blurred in images. Within the aperture of a single frame, they move at high speed over distances larger than their size. FMOs typically appear as blurred streaks formed as a composition of the background and their blurred ap-pearance. Other scenarios include fast rotations of objects like ventilators or propellers. FMOs are common in ev-eryday scenarios like fast cars, falling objects, flying in-sects, rain, and hailstorm. They are mainly present in sports videos such as tennis, football, badminton, or other games with moving objects. Applications of FMO detec-tion methods are temporal super-resolution, speed measure-ment, FMO retrieval, tracking, removal, and highlighting.
Figure 1. Examples of automatically detected fast moving objects (FMOs) by the proposed method on soccer (top) and volleyball (bottom) videos.
FMOs were introduced in [24], where the authors cre-ated the first dataset containing fast moving objects and pro-posed a proof-of-concept algorithm to detect and track such objects. The problem of detecting and tracking FMOs has been unnoticed by the research community, and such ob-jects are not present in standard tracking datasets such as
VOT [15], OTB [28], and ALOV [26]. More precisely, they may or may not be present, but FMO is never the object intended for tracking by the ground truth annota-tion. We highlight this by running FMO retrieval by the proposed method and detect FMOs in very recent standard large datasets like GOT-10k [8] and LaSOT [5] and find unannotated FMOs (Fig. 1, bottom). By processing the ground truth bounding boxes in more than 5M frames from both datasets, we noticed that there is a significant overlap between consecutive bounding boxes in almost all cases, and the speed is close to zero (Fig. 3). In contrast, the re-cently proposed TbD dataset [13] with fast moving objects has almost zero intersection over union between consecu-tive objects, and the speed is higher.
Apart from [24], there are a few methods that deal with
FMOs. Tracking by Deblatting (TbD) [13] jointly solves an inverse problem of deblatting (deblurring and matting) and decouples the input images into trajectory, appearance, and
Bird [0:09]
Head [1:27]
Rabbit [2:40]
Hand [3:52]
Ceiling fan [5:03]
Cap [1:01]
Toast [3:34]
Figure 2. Examples of fast moving object (FMO) retrieval on YouTube videos by our method running in real-time. Top: frames from a 10-minute surveillance footage [youtu.be/CkVJyAKwByw]. Bottom: frames from a 5-minute trick-shot video [youtu.be/A2FsgKoGD04].
For each image, the detected FMO and its trajectory is shown as a red line in a close-up below. The object description contains a digitally clickable link to the timestamp when the event happened, in [minutes:seconds] format.
Newspaper [3:39]
Tennis ball [4:05]
Keys [1:49] 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0
Got10k [8]
LaSOT [5]
TbD [13] 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 (a) IoU(GTt,GTt+1) 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0
Got10k [8]
LaSOT [5]
TbD [13] 0 0.5 1 (b) Normalized speed 1.5 ting [13] problem, we first solve the matting problem that separates the background from the input image by learning from synthetic data. Then, an easier deblurring problem is solved by energy minimization. The proposed FMODe-tect is real-time capable and achieves state-of-the-art perfor-mance, which allows us to tackle challenging applications such as FMO retrieval and tracking in long videos (Fig. 2).
In summary, we make the following contributions: 2
Figure 3. Histograms of (a) Intersection over Union (IoU) scores between consecutive ground truth bounding boxes and (b) speed normalized by the object size for datasets GOT-10k [8], La-SOT [5], and TbD [13] that focuses on FMOs. FMOs are present in GOT-10k and LaSOT datasets, but never annotated, i.e. trackers are not tested on fast moving objects. mask. All previous methods are based on classical energy minimization. While powerful, they still require many pa-rameter tuning and are slow. In most cases, they have to be tuned for different sequences separately. Also, their per-formance is not entirely satisfactory, and they force several limiting assumptions, e.g. static camera, high contrast be-tween the object and the background, and spherical shape.
This paper proposes a novel method for FMO detection and trajectory and appearance estimation using a combina-tion of deep learning and energy minimization based deblur-ring. Instead of solving an ill-posed and complex deblat-• We present the first learned approach to the problem of
FMO detection. Compared to the previous methods, the proposed one is simpler, does not require extensive parameter tuning, and works with the same settings for a wide range of scenarios, e.g. objects of different com-plexities, moving among various trajectories, and cap-tured by moving or zooming cameras. The method is trained on a new synthetic dataset and generalizes well to unseen and more difficult real-world data.
• By separating deblatting into matting and deblurring, computational and problem complexities are simpli-fied, and the method achieves state-of-the-art results.
Our method is an order of magnitude faster than the previous methods, and the detection part is real-time capable. This makes applications such as robust FMO retrieval from large video collections realistic.
• For the sharp appearance estimation, we propose a novel energy minimization-based deblurring.
2.