Abstract
Fashion is intertwined with external cultural factors, but identifying these links remains a manual process limited to only the most salient phenomena. We propose a data-driven approach to identify specific cultural factors affecting the clothes people wear. Using large-scale datasets of news ar-ticles and vintage photos spanning a century, we present a multi-modal statistical model to detect influence relation-ships between happenings in the world and people’s choice of clothing. Furthermore, on two image datasets we ap-ply our model to improve the concrete vision tasks of visual style forecasting and photo timestamping. Our work is a first step towards a computational, scalable, and easily re-freshable approach to link culture to clothing. 1.

Introduction
Fashion is much more than Paris runways and Instagram darlings. Fashion is what all people wear—how they ex-press their identity, taste, interests, and even mood. At the same time, fashion is a reflection of our society and its cul-tural influences. Studying clothing trends over long periods of time offers anthropologists a treasure trove of informa-tion about how people’s clothing is affected by happenings in the world, whether economic, political, or social.
The effects are felt from both localized and broad sources. On the one hand, one-off momentous occasions or iconic individuals can cause ripples of fashion changes, such as the publicity surrounding Titanic’s voyage that at-tracted American designers to European fashions in the 1910s [13], or the oversized sunglasses donned by Jackie
Kennedy that continue to inspire women decades later [3].
On the other hand, longer periods of a collective experi-ence can also shape trends, such as U.S. women of the 1950s forgoing boxier wartime styles for softer lines and full skirts [7], or some African-Americans embracing ethnic
Afro hairstyles following the civil rights movement [1], or today’s shift towards comfortable casual wear in the midst of the COVID pandemic and work-from-home conditions.
While such links are intriguing, today they require peo-ple cognizant of both clothing and cultural trends to manu-ally tease them out. This process requires expert knowledge and expensive labor, making it difficult to scale. As a re-sult, such analysis is not updated frequently, and it focuses mostly on a few major salient styles (like those referenced above), ignoring many more subtle or localized ones.
We propose to automatically discover which events and
which cultural factors influence the evolution of fashion styles (see Fig. 1). Our idea is to associate changing style trends observed in photos with their preceding world events.
To that end, we explore how photos and news articles can together tell the story of why certain clothing elements ebb and flow—or spike and disappear—over time. Specifically, we investigate temporal relations and statistical influences between latent topics discovered from 100M news articles and fashion styles mined from both i) Vintage, a new dataset spanning a century of vintage photos and ii) GeoStyle [44], a massive set of social media photos spanning recent years.
Upon discovering influential events, we demonstrate their significance by posing style forecasting and photo times-tamping tasks. On two datasets, we show that modeling the culture-clothing link enables more accurate forecasts of vi-sual styles’ future popularity and more accurate dating of an unseen clothing photo.
The key novelty of this work is to formalize and auto-mate the process of tying cultural factors to fashion. To meet that goal, we devise technical components on the com-puter vision and statistical modeling side, such as a robust visual style discovery pipeline based on body regions and a multi-modal Granger causality module. To our knowledge, we are the first to quantify the links from cultural trends to fashion trends in image data, and the first to demonstrate the value for forecasting and timestamping. We show the former improves over existing methods in the literature. In addition, we show examples of the discovered influences, both dominant and subtle. Beyond providing better fore-casts and timestamping, our approach is a step towards a computational, scalable, and easily refreshable way to un-derstand how external factors affect the clothes we wear. 2.