Abstract 1.

Introduction
Human trajectory forecasting is an inherently multi-modal problem. Uncertainty in future trajectories stems from two sources: (a) sources that are known to the agent but unknown to the model, such as long term goals and (b) sources that are unknown to both the agent and the model, such as the intent of other agents and irreducible random-ness in decisions. We propose to factorize this uncertainty into its epistemic and aleatoric sources. We model the epis-temic uncertainty through multimodality in long term goals and the aleatoric uncertainty through multimodality in way-points and paths. To exemplify this dichotomy, we also pro-pose a novel long term trajectory forecasting setting, with prediction horizons up to a minute, up to an order of mag-nitude longer than prior works. Finally, we present Y-net, a scene compliant trajectory forecasting network that exploits the proposed epistemic and aleatoric structure for diverse trajectory predictions across long prediction horizons. Y-net significantly improves previous state-of-the-art perfor-mance on both (a) The short prediction horizon setting on the Stanford Drone (31.7% in FDE) and ETH/UCY datasets (7.4% in FDE) and (b) The proposed long horizon setting on the re-purposed Stanford Drone and Intersection Drone datasets.
Sequence prediction is a fundamental problem in sev-eral engineering disciplines such as signal processing, pat-tern recognition, control engineering, and in virtually any domain concerned with temporal measurements. From the seminal work of A. A. Markov [29] on predicting the next syllable in the poem Eugene Onegin with Markov chains, to modern day autoregressive descendants like GPT-3 [6], next element prediction in a sequence has a long standing history. Time series forecasting is a key instantiation of the sequence prediction problem in the setting where the sequence is formed by elements sampled in time. Sev-eral classic techniques such as Autoregressive Moving Av-erage Models (ARMA) [43] have been incorporated in deep learning architectures [41, 16] in modern day state-of-the-art time series forecasting methods [37].
However, humans are not inanimate Newtonian entities, slaves to predetermined physical laws and forces. Predict-ing the future motion of a billiard ball smoothly rolling on a pool table under friction and physical constraints is a prob-lem of different nature from forecasting human motion and
∗ indicates equal contribution.
positions. Humans are goal conditioned agents that, unlike the ball, exert their will through actions to achieve a desired outcome [40]. Anticipating human motion is of fundamen-tal importance to dynamic agents such as other humans, au-tonomous robots [3] and self-driving vehicles [39]. Human motion is inherently goal directed and is put in place by the agent to bring about a desired effect.
Nevertheless, even conditioned on the agent’s past mo-tion and overarching long term goals, is the future trajec-tory deterministic? Consider yourself standing at a cross-ing on a busy street, waiting for the pedestrian light to turn green. While you have every intention of crossing the street, the exact future trajectory remains stochastic as you might swerve to avoid other pedestrians, speed up your pace if the light is about to turn red, or pause abruptly if an unruly cyclist dashes by. Hence, even conditioned on the past ob-served motion and scene semantics, future human motion is inherently stochastic [14] owing to both epistemic un-certainty caused by latent decision variables like long term goals and aleatoric variability [10] stemming from random decision variables such as environmental factors. This di-chotomy is even sharper in long term forecasting since due to the increased uncertainty in the future, the aleatoric ran-domness influences the trajectory much more strongly in long rather than short temporal horizons.
This motivates a factorized multimodal approach for hu-man dynamics modeling where both factors of stochasticity are modeled hierarchically rather than lumped jointly. We hypothesize that the long term latent goals of the agent rep-resent the epistemic uncertainty within motion prediction.
While the agent has a goal in mind while planning and exe-cuting their trajectory, this is unknown to the prediction sys-tem. In physical terms, this is akin to the question of where the agent wants to go. Similarly, the aleatoric uncertainty is expressed in the stochasticity of the path leading to the goal, which encompasses factors like environment variables such as other agents, partial scene information available to the agent and most importantly, the unconscious randomness in human decisions [18]. In physical terms, this is akin to the question of how the agent reaches the goal.
Hence, we propose to model the epistemic uncertainty first and then model the aleatoric stochasticity conditioned on the obtained estimate. Concretely, with the RGB scene and the past motion history, we first estimate an explicit probability distribution over the agent’s long term goals.
This represents the epistemic uncertainty in the prediction system. We also estimate distributions over a few chosen fu-ture waypoint positions which along with the sampled goal points are used to obtain explicit probability maps over all the remaining intermediate trajectory positions. This rep-resents the aleatoric uncertainty in the prediction system.
Together the samples from the epistemic goal distribution and the aleatoric waypoint and trajectory distribution form the predicted future trajectory.
In summary, our contribution is threefold. First, we pro-pose a novel long term prediction setting that extends up to a minute in the future which is about an order of mag-nitude longer than previous literature. Second, we pro-pose Y-net, a scene-compliant long term trajectory pre-diction network that explicitly models both the goal and path multi-modalities while making effective use of the scene semantics. Third, we show that the factorized mul-timodality modeling enables Y-net to improve the state-of-the-art both on the proposed long term settings and the well-studied short term prediction settings. We bench-mark Y-net’s performance on the Stanford Drone [32] and the ETH [31]/UCY[23] benchmark in the short term setting.
It outperforms previous approaches by signifi-cant margins of 13.0% in ADE and 31.7% in FDE met-ric on SDD, and on-par in ADE and by 7.4% in FDE on ETH/UCY. Further, we also study Y-net’s performance in the proposed long term prediction setting on the Stan-ford Drone and the Intersection Drone Dataset [5] where it substantially improves the performance of state-of-the-art short term methods by over 50.7% and 39.7% respec-tively, on ADE and 77.1% and 56.0% respectively, on FDE metric. The preprocessed data, model, and code can be found here for future work: https://karttikeya. github.io/publication/ynet/ 2.