Abstract
We contribute to approximate algorithms for the quadratic assignment problem also known as graph match-ing. Inspired by the success of the fusion moves technique developed for multilabel discrete Markov random fields, we investigate its applicability to graph matching. In particu-lar, we show how fusion moves can be efficiently combined with the dedicated state-of-the-art dual methods that have recently shown superior results in computer vision and bio-imaging applications. As our empirical evaluation on a wide variety of graph matching datasets suggests, fusion moves significantly improve performance of these methods in terms of speed and quality of the obtained solutions. Our method sets a new state-of-the-art with a notable margin with respect to its competitors. 1.

Introduction
The quadratic assignment problem also known as graph matching is one of the most prominent combinatorial prob-In computer vision lems having numerous applications. it is predominantly used for feature matching [47]. The modern approach to this application is deep graph match-ing, see e.g. [40, 42, 55], which enjoys constantly growing attention in the community. As follows from the name, deep graph matching combines neural networks with combi-natorial matching techniques for inference and joint learn-ing. Whereas most of earlier deep graph matching ap-proaches [17, 24, 51, 52, 53] employed a linear assignment problem (LAP) solver1 to obtain matchings in their pipeline, the most promising state-of-the-art method [40] uses a fully featured graph matching solver. Being called in a loop on
Acknowledgements. This work was supported by the European Re-search Council (ERC European Unions Horizon 2020 research and in-novation program, grant 647769), the German Research Foundation (Ex-act Relaxation-Based Inference in Graphical Models, DFG SA 2640/1-1), and the Helmholtz Information & Data Science School for Health (HIDSS4Health). The computations were performed on an HPC Cluster at the Center for Information Services and High Performance Computing (ZIH) at TU Dresden. 1A polynomial subclass of graph matching without quadratic costs.
Figure 1. (Top) Scalable graph matching is especially important for bio-imaging, where hundreds or even thousands of cells on different images must be matched to each other. An instance from the pairs dataset (see Sec. 6), only each 5th matching is shown. (bottom)
Convergence of the state-of-the-art method dd-ls0 [47] (see Sec. 6) without and with fusion moves. Note that fusion moves attain much better energy in notably shorter time. each training iteration, this solver must provide high-quality solutions within a very restricted time budget, typically less than a second. Modern state-of-the-art methods [46, 47, 56] satisfy this requirement only if applied to relatively small problems, with a few dozen feature points at most. Hence, scalability of deep graph matching critically depends on the existence of highly-efficient graph matching solvers.
In this work we address this problem by introducing a new graph matching technique, which notably improves the state-of-the-art in terms of speed and attained accuracy. In particular, it provides highly accurate solutions for problems with more than 500 features in less than a second.