Abstract
Pixel-to-mesh has wide applications, especially in virtual or augmented reality, animation and game industry. How-ever, existing mesh reconstruction models perform unsat-isfactorily in local geometry details due to ignoring mesh topology information during learning. Besides, most meth-ods are constrained by the initial template, which can-not reconstruct meshes of various genus.
In this work, we propose a geometric granularity-aware pixel-to-mesh framework with a ﬁdelity-selection-and-guarantee strategy, which explicitly addresses both challenges. First, a geome-try structure extractor is proposed for detecting local high structured parts and capturing local spatial feature. Sec-ond, we apply it to facilitate pixel-to-mesh mapping and re-solve coarse details problem caused by the neglect of struc-tural information in previous practices. Finally, a mesh edit module is proposed to encourage non-zero genus topology to emergence by ﬁne-grained topology modiﬁcation and a patching algorithm is introduced to repair the non-closed boundaries. Extensive experimental results, both quantita-tively and visually have demonstrated the high reconstruc-tion ﬁdelity achieved by the proposed framework. (a) Ground truth (b) Deep Mesh (c) Ours (d) Input image (e) Pixel2Mesh (f) GEOMetrics
Figure 1: Monocular reconstruction results of the state of the art deformation-based learning approaches. (a) Ground truth; (b) Deep Mesh [40], the green lines and triangles mark the non-closed boundaries correspondingly; (c) Ours; (d) In-put image; (e) Pixel2Mesh [51]; (f) GEOMetrics [46]. Rel-atively, our method can better deal with the topology in de-tails and reconstruct holes of the object without non-closed boundaries. 1.

Introduction
Mesh is a widely used 3D representation, especially in virtual/augmented reality, animation and game industry, for its capability of modeling geometric details. As an alter-native or auxiliary of traditional manual mesh, 3D recon-struction from pixel level attracts a growing attention and has achieved promising results. According to the format of the generated 3D model, existing reconstructed methods can be divided into image to voxel, image to point-cloud, image to mesh, etc [22]. More recently, implicit repre-sentation [41, 8, 58] has been used for 3D reconstruction and some new reconstructing forms also come up, such as
NeRF [37]. Among these methods, 3D mesh reconstruc-tion attracts much attention because it is the most popular shape representation in game and movie industries. Recent progress in single-view mesh reconstruction proposes to re-construct a 3D mesh by deforming a template model based
†Corresponding author on the perceptual features extracted from the input image
[51]. Though promising results have been achieved, the re-constructed results are unsatisfactory on local details and non-zero genus objects.
The ﬁrst challenge in reconstruction is to generate precise and rich details. Existing methods mainly utilize the cham-fer distance between two point clouds, which are sampled from predicted mesh and the ground truth respectively, to restrict the reconstruction. Although some other constraints are added, such as normal loss [27] which enforces the con-sistency of surface normal and edge length regularization to prevent outliers [45]. All of them only focus on the point clouds, without considering the topology of mesh. Replac-ing mesh with point cloud smooths out local structure de-tails and corresponding local structure information, leading to coarse reconstruction details. Besides, it is not reasonable to treat all parts of a mesh equally for the uneven informa-tion distribution on it, which means high-ﬁdelity parts need extra attention. Treating the mesh as point cloud and in-discriminately overall processing of existing methods show disadvantages in parts with large curvature changes and rich details, like table corners and chair legs, represented by ab-normally smooth and even disordered connection on the re-constructed mesh. The lack of details leads to noticeable gaps between reconstructed mesh and manual one, which affects practical application.
Another obstacle is to reconstruct non-zero genus ob-jects, where the holes need to be reproduced. This problem is especially obvious in pixel-to-mesh reconstruction, where initial template is imported and the network is trained to guide movements of vertices. According to topology defor-mation theory [52, 2], the objects of same genus are home-omorphism and can be transformed into each other through deformation while objects of different genus cannot. This suggests the initial template restricts the reconstruction re-sults, which we show in Figure 2. Thus, how to realize the change of genus is a key problem to precise mesh re-construction. Mesh edit provides a way out for the change of genus, but the reﬁnement of the pruned area and ensu-ing open boundary issues are also shown in related attempts
[40]. Although other methods, such as point/voxel and SDF reconstruction [14, 11, 41] seem to avoid this problem, they may suffer from missing parts and holes when transformed to mesh using Marching Cubes algorithms [4]. Therefore
Deformation
Deformation + Mesh edit
Figure 2: Translation relationship between different genus topologies. in this paper, we aim to address the above mentioned lim-itations by introducing geometric granularity-aware pixel-to-mesh framework with a ﬁdelity-selection-and-guarantee strategy. The model selects high-ﬁdelity parts and realizes partially re-sampling, which are used to guide subsequent deformation and in turn guarantee the ﬁdelity of reconstruc-tion results. The framework consists of a Multi-scale Geom-etry Structure Extractor (GSE), a geometry-aware deforma-tion network, and a ﬁne-grained mesh edit module. Firstly, in order to capture important local geometry features, we propose the multi-scale geometry extractor.
It locates vi-sually perceptible high-ﬁdelity areas by detecting semantic key points around with rich details and complex structure.
Then it captures the geometry structures of the key areas by forming subgraphs rooted by the key points. Leverag-ing the subgraphs sets of given meshes, geometry extrac-tor measures local structural similarity of the meshes us-ing weighted graph kernel [50]. Then, to improve the re-construction details of existing methods, we introduce the
Geometry Structure Extractor into monocular 3D mesh re-construction. Note that the GSE is general and can be ex-tended to other tasks related to mesh data, such as classiﬁca-tion and retrieval. In the deformation stage, multi-scale lo-cal geometry features captured by the extractor restrict and guide movements of vertexes on the template mesh. Af-ter deformation, to break through the restrict of the genus 0 initial template on reconstructed objects, we introduce a
Fine-grained Edit Module. In order to realize ﬁne-grained edit, faces are subdivided adaptively according to the esti-mated error degrees. Then after the second error estima-tion, pruning is operated. Finally, the edit module reﬁnes the boundaries and provides a Patching Algorithm to repair the non-closed boundaries. By the GSE and the Fine-grained
Edit modules, our framework realizes geometry granularity-aware reconstruction and reformulates the pipeline of pixel-to-mesh. To the best of our knowledge, our framework is the ﬁrst to realize integral reconstruction while focusing on the two core issues in reconstruction at the same time. It’s also the ﬁrst to explicitly extract local features of meshes and realize ﬁne-grained edit.
The contributions of this paper can be summarized as:
• We propose a Geometry Structure Extractor (GSE) for mesh data to locate key areas and explicitly extract local ge-ometry information, which helps to retain structure informa-tion of the graph data in Hilbert high-dimensional space.
• We design a Multi-scale Shape Preserving Constraint to facilitate pixel-to-mesh mapping and then validate its ef-fectiveness on a deformation-based reconstruction network.
• We introduce a Fine-grained Mesh Edit module which consists of an adaptive pruning module and a patching repair algorithm that break the restriction of the template mesh and allow objects of various genus to emergence. 2.