Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel method for representa-tion and classiﬁcation of two-person interactions from 3D skeleton sequences. The key idea of our approach is to use
Gaussian distributions to capture statistics on Rn and those on the space of symmetric positive deﬁnite (SPD) matrices.
The main challenge is how to parametrize those distribu-tions. Towards this end, we develop methods for embedding
Gaussian distributions in matrix groups based on the the-ory of Lie groups and Riemannian symmetric spaces. Our method relies on the Riemannian geometry of the under-lying manifolds and has the advantage of encoding high-order statistics from 3D joint positions. We show that the proposed method achieves competitive results in two-person interaction recognition on three benchmarks for 3D human activity understanding. 1.

Introduction 3D skeleton-based action recognition has been an active research topic in recent years with many potential applica-tions. In this work, we focus on 3D skeleton-based two-person interaction recognition (3DTPIR). Compared to a large number of general-purpose methods for 3D skeleton-based action recognition, methods for 3DTPIR are much less studied in the literature. Recent works [46, 63] have shown that state-of-the-art action recognition methods do not always perform well on human interaction recognition.
This is because they lack an effective mechanism for cap-turing intra-person and inter-person joint relationships [46].
In two-person interactions, arm and leg movements are highly correlated. However, these correlations are simply encoded by distances between joints in most existing works for 3DTPIR [17, 18, 42, 65]. This motivates us to use high-order statistics, i.e. covariance matrices to better capture these interactions. It has been known that n × n covariance matrices lie on a special type of Riemannian manifolds, i.e.
SPD manifolds (denoted by Sym+ n ). A large body of works has been developed for classiﬁcation of SPD-valued data.
Recently, SPD neural networks have demonstrated impres-sive results [13]. One of the core issues that remains open is the ﬁnding of effective and efﬁcient methods for mod-eling probability distributions on Sym+ n . Since Gaussian distributions (abbreviated as Gaussians) on Rn are the most popular probability distributions used in statistics, existing works mainly focused on generalizing them to Sym+ n . Such a generalization was ﬁrst given in [43] in a more general context of Riemannian manifolds. However, the asymptotic formulae of Riemannian Gaussian distributions (abbrevi-ated as Riemannian Gaussians) proposed in this work make them hard to evaluate and apply in practice. Some works aim to address this shortcoming by introducing notions of
Riemannian Gaussians in symmetric spaces [49, 50] and homogeneous spaces [6]. These have been successfully ap-plied to classiﬁcation problems. In this work, we also inter-ested in Riemannian Gaussians for classiﬁcation. However, differently from the above works, we seek methods for em-bedding Riemannian Gaussians in matrix groups. This al-lows us to perform classiﬁcation of Riemannian Gaussians without having to resort to an exact expression of their prob-ability density function as in [6, 49, 50].
In summary, the main contributions of this work are:
• We propose an embedding method for Gaussians by mapping them diffeomorphically to Riemannian sym-metric spaces.
• We consider representing a 3D skeleton sequence by a set of SPD matrices that leads us to the study of statistics on Sym+ n . We show that the product space of mean and covariance on Sym+ n can be viewed as a Lie group with an appropriate group product. More-over, we point out a connection between this space and the group of lower triangular matrices with positive di-agonal entries.
• Based on the theory described above, we introduce a neural network for learning a geometric representation from a 3D skeleton sequence.
• Experiments on three benchmarks for 3D human ac-tivity understanding demonstrate the competitiveness of our method with state-of-the-art methods. 2.