Abstract
A typical man-made structure can be abstracted as the
Manhattan world assumption, in which notion is further represented as a Manhattan Frame (MF) deﬁned by three orthogonal axes. The problem of MF estimation can be for-mulated as the solution of the rotation between the MF and the camera frame (called the ”MF rotation”). However, the whole rotation space is quite redundant for solving the MF rotation, which is one of the main factors that disturb the computational efﬁciency of those methods associated with a rotation space search. This paper proves that the vol-ume of the space that just contains all MF rotations (called the ”MFR space”) is only 1 / 24 of that of the whole ro-tation space, and then an exact MFR space is delimited from the rotation space. Searching in the delimited MFR space, the MF estimation solved by a branch-and-bound (BnB) framework guarantees stability and efﬁciency simul-taneously. Furthermore, the general rotation problems as-sociated with a rotation space search are solved more ef-ﬁciently. Experiments on synthetic and real datasets have successfully conﬁrmed the validity of our approach. 1.

Introduction
Most man-made environments generally exhibit particu-lar regularity like parallelism and orthogonality, which can be represented by a set of parallel and orthogonal struc-tural lines. These structural forms are commonly abstracted as Manhattan world (MW) [1] assumption that consists of three mutually orthogonal directions corresponding to three orthogonal vanishing points (VP) in image plane of cam-era. By virtue of its simplicity, MW assumption has been successfully applied to many higher-level computer vision tasks, such as calibration of camera parameters [2, 3], scene
This research is supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61573053, 61673385).
∗The corresponding author is Yu Song, songyu@bjtu.edu.cn. understanding [7, 8, 9] and SLAM [10, 11, 12].
Since the introduction of the notion of Manhattan Frame (MF) [20], which is deﬁned by three orthogonal axes cor-responding to the three directions of MW, a considerable amount of work has been devoted to the stability and efﬁ-ciency of MF estimation. However it is still challenging to satisfy both of the two properties. By formulating the prob-lem of MF estimation as the solution of the rotation between the MF and the camera frame (called the ”MF rotation”), state-of-the-art methods [15, 16] exhaustively search in the whole rotation space to meet a globally optimal solution in terms of maximizing the number of inliers. These methods are robust and accurate enough to guarantee the stability, but the computational efﬁciency is intractable for the time critical applications, e.g., SLAM and navigation.
A remarkable fact is that the whole rotation space is quite redundant for all MF rotations, which is one of the main fac-tors that disturbs the computational efﬁciency of the param-eter search-based methods (typically using a branch-and-bound (BnB) framework [14]). The goal of this paper is to delimit a special sub-space that just contains all MF ro-tations (hereinafter called the ”MFR space”). To achieve this, we prove that the whole rotation space can be evenly divided into 24 congruent MFR spaces, any of which just contains all MF rotations. Within a delimited MFR space, the MF estimation approach, e.g., BnB-based algorithm, guarantees globally optimal solution satisfying both stabil-ity and efﬁciency. Moreover, based on the theory of rotation space delimitation, the general rotation estimation problems solved by the BnB-based algorithm associated with a rota-tion space search, e.g., the panorama stitching [15, 17, 35], the estimation of camera pose [13, 26], the 3D registration
[15, 33, 34] and the tilt-pan camera calibration [4, 5, 6], can be improved greatly. Overall, the main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
• We prove the redundancy of search in whole rotation space for the MF estimation. The volume of the MFR space is only 1 / 24 of that of the whole rotation space
theoretically.
• We prove that a cube with the half side length π/4 in the rotation space parametrized by angle-axis rep-resentation is just enough to tightly enclose a MFR space, and then an exact MFR space is delimited.
• Searching in the delimited MFR space, the efﬁciency of MF estimation based on BnB is improved by about 25 times, which satisﬁes both stability and ef-ﬁciency of this problem. Furthermore, the general ro-tation problems associated with a whole rotation space search are solved more efﬁciently. 2.