Abstract
Recently, transfer subspace learning based approaches have shown to be a valid alternative to unsupervised sub-space clustering and temporal data clustering for human motion segmentation (HMS). These approaches leverage prior knowledge from a source domain to improve clus-tering performance on a target domain, and currently they represent the state of the art in HMS. Bucking this trend, in this paper, we propose a novel unsupervised model that learns a representation of the data and digs clustering in-formation from the data itself. Our model is reminiscent of temporal subspace clustering, but presents two critical differences. First, we learn an auxiliary data matrix that can deviate from the initial data, hence confers more de-grees of freedom to the coding matrix. Second, we intro-duce a regularization term for this auxiliary data matrix that preserves the local geometrical structure present in the high-dimensional space. The proposed model is efﬁ-ciently optimized by using an original Alternating Direc-tion Method of Multipliers (ADMM) formulation allowing to learn jointly the auxiliary data representation, a non-negative dictionary and a coding matrix. Experimental re-sults on four benchmark datasets for HMS demonstrate that our approach achieves signiﬁcantly better clustering per-formance then state-of-the-art methods, including both un-supervised and more recent semi-supervised transfer learn-ing approaches1. 1.

Introduction
Human-motion segmentation (HMS) aims at breaking a continuous sequence of data depicting human actions and activities into a set of internally coherent temporal seg-ments, and has emerged as a suitable ﬁrst step in early pro-cessing of untrimmed videos for human action recognition
[12]. Despite the fact that HMS has been intensively inves-tigated so far [28, 15, 35], performance have not yet reached the level of accuracy required in real world applications.
Because labelling large amounts of videos for creating a 1Project page at URL https://github.com/mdimiccoli/GCRL-for-HMS/. training set for HMS is very expensive and time-consuming, the problem has been traditionally addressed through un-supervised learning techniques [22, 2, 21]. Several ap-proaches cast HMS as a clustering problem by relying on the framework of subspace clustering [30]. The key idea of subspace clustering is to learn an effective representa-tion in form of a coding matrix from which it is possible to construct an afﬁnity matrix that allows to separate data points according to their underlying low-dimensional sub-spaces. These subspaces are assumed to correspond with the different motions. However, these clustering approaches typically do not take into account temporal continuity and, moreover, they are sensitive to noise. Some recent subspace clustering based approaches have focused on dealing with noise and outliers naturally present in the data, as well as with its sequential nature [6, 7, 28, 15, 16]. Outside the subspace clustering framework, other temporal clustering approaches work directly on the temporal data instead of on an underlying representation to estimate cluster labels
[27, 36, 13]. Nevertheless, the main challenge of all these unsupervised approaches remains how to cope with the lack of prior knowledge, which could easily cause unpredictable segmentation output. Recently, this problem has been par-tially addressed by transfer subspace techniques, that lever-age prior information from source data to improve cluster-ing accuracy on the target data [31, 32, 40]. These methods have indeed reported improved performance and currently represent the state of the art in HMS.
Instead of leveraging information from source anno-tated data, here we propose to cope with the lack of prior knowledge in an unsupervised fashion by further exploiting the local geometric structure present in the original high-dimensional space. Our a priori on the data samples is that they are drawn from an unknown underlying similar-ity graph, where nodes in the graph correspond to individ-ual frames, edges to connections between nodes, and com-munities (i.e., groups of nodes that are interconnected by edges with large weights) roughly correspond to different motions. Our model aims at jointly learning the subspaces and a compatible representation for the similarity graph.
Since we are interested in pushing the limits of state-of-the-art HMS, we build on the framework of Temporal Sub-space Clustering (TSC) [15], that has proven to be the most effective subspace clustering technique for temporal data without transfer. The rational underlying TSC is to ﬁnd a coding matrix whose afﬁnity graph leads to good clustering with temporal coherence. This is ensured by a least squares regression formulation where the original data are approx-imated through a nonnegative dictionary and code under block diagonal and temporal Laplacian regularization terms that lend the model its global subspace structure and tem-poral smoothness, respectively. However, when the original data is noisy or corrupted, nuisances propagate also to the coding matrix. To avoid this, we allow the auxiliary data representation to vary, hence conferring to the coding ma-trix more degrees of freedom and robustness to subspace assumption violations and noise. Our prior for the auxiliary data matrix is that its columns act as representation vectors for the afﬁnity matrix (graph) of the original data. There-fore, we introduce a graph regularization term, that controls the distance between the afﬁnity graphs of the original and auxiliary data. This effectively allows the auxiliary data to cope with data nuisances while preserving the local geomet-rical structure of the original data. We propose an efﬁcient optimization formulation for our model, based on the Alter-nating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM).
Our main contributions are summarized as follows: 1) we propose a novel approach for HMS, which jointly learns an auxiliary data matrix, a non-negative dictionary and a coding matrix under temporal, block-diagonal and graph constraints via an original ADMM formulation, 2) we introduce an original graph regularization term that pre-serves the geometrical structure of the original data in high-dimensional space, 3) we present a comprehensive analy-sis of our model, including ablation study and sensitive-ness analysis, 4) we achieve signiﬁcant performance im-5% NMI) over provements (up to the state-of-the-art methods on four public benchmarks for
HMS. 20% accuracy and
⇡
⇡ 2.