Abstract
Assessing action quality is challenging due to the subtle differences between videos and large variations in scores.
Most existing approaches tackle this problem by regressing a quality score from a single video, suffering a lot from
In this paper, we the large inter-video score variations. show that the relations among videos can provide impor-tant clues for more accurate action quality assessment dur-ing both training and inference. Speciﬁcally, we reformu-late the problem of action quality assessment as regressing the relative scores with reference to another video that has shared attributes (e.g., category and difﬁculty), instead of learning unreferenced scores. Following this formulation, we propose a new Contrastive Regression (CoRe) frame-work to learn the relative scores by pair-wise comparison, which highlights the differences between videos and guides the models to learn the key hints for assessment. In order to further exploit the relative information between two videos, we devise a group-aware regression tree to convert the con-ventional score regression into two easier sub-problems: coarse-to-ﬁne classiﬁcation and regression in small inter-vals. To demonstrate the effectiveness of CoRe, we conduct extensive experiments on three mainstream AQA datasets including AQA-7, MTL-AQA and JIGSAWS. Our approach outperforms previous methods by a large margin and estab-lishes new state-of-the-art on all three benchmarks. 1.

Introduction
Action quality assessment (AQA), which aims to eval-uate how well a speciﬁc action is performed, has attracted growing attention in recent years since it plays a crucial role in many real world applications including sports [9, 20, 13, 23, 24, 22, 31, 21], healthcare [17, 39, 26, 38, 41, 42] and others [5, 6]. Unlike conventional action recognition tasks
∗Equal contribution. †Corresponding author.
Figure 1: Our Contrastive Regression (CoRe) framework for action quality assessment. Inspired by contrastive learn-ing that learns representation by encouraging the distances of samples (e.g., dA and dB) to reﬂect their semantic re-lationship, we learn an AQA model to regress the relative scores (e.g., ∆A and ∆B) to reﬂect the differences of ac-tion quality among videos. By comparing two videos with different scores, CoRe encourage the model to learn from differences between videos for assessment. that focus on action classiﬁcation [12, 33, 32, 27, 15, 7, 34] and detection [40, 16, 28, 37, 18], AQA is more challenging as it requires the model to predict ﬁne-grained scores from videos that describe the same action. Considering the dif-ferences between videos and large variations in scores, we argue that a key to addressing this problem is to discover the differences among the videos and predict scores based on the differences.
Many efforts have been made to tackle this problem over the past few years [19, 22, 6, 35, 20]. Most of them formu-late the AQA as a regression problem, where the scores are directly predicted from a single video. While some promis-1
ing results have been achieved, AQA still faces three chal-lenges. First, since the score labels are usually annotated by human judges (e.g., the score of the diving game is cal-culated by summarizing scores from different judges, then multiplied by the degree of difﬁculty), the subjective ap-praisal of judges makes accurate score prediction quite dif-ﬁcult. Second, the difference between videos for AQA is very subtle, since actors are usually performing the same action in a similar environment. Last, most current models are evaluated based on Spearman’s Rank, which may not faithfully reﬂect the prediction performance (see our dis-cussions in Section 4.1).
Towards a better AQA framework that can utilize the dif-ferences among the videos to predict the ﬁnal rating, we borrow the merits from the concept of contrastive learn-ing [10, 4]. Contrastive learning (Figure 1, top-left) aims to learn a better representation space where the distance dA between two similar samples X, XA is enforced to be small while the distance dB between the dissimilar ones X, XB is encouraged to be large. Therefore, the distance in the repre-sentation space can already reﬂect the semantic relationship between two samples (i.e., if they are from the same cate-gory). Analogically, in the context of AQA, we aim to learn a model that can map the input video into the score space where the differences between the action qualities can be measured by the relative scores (∆A, ∆B). Motivated by this, we propose a Contrastive Regression (CoRe) frame-work for the AQA task. Unlike previous works which aim to predict the scores directly, we propose to regress the rel-ative scores between an input video and several exemplar videos as references.
Moreover, as a step towards more accurate score pre-diction, we devise a group-aware regression tree (GART) to convert the relative score regression into two easier sub-problems: (1) coarse-to-ﬁne classiﬁcation. We ﬁrst divide the range of the relative score into several non-overlapping intervals (i.e., groups) and then use a binary tree to allocate the relative score to a certain group by performing classiﬁ-cation progressively; (2) regression in a small interval. We perform regression inside the group where the relative score lies and predict the ﬁnal score. As another contribution, we design a new metric, called relative L2-distance (R-(cid:96)2) to more precisely measure the performance of action quality assessment by considering the intra-class variance.
To verify the effectiveness of our method, we conduct extensive experiments on three mainstream AQA datasets containing both Olympic and surgical actions, namely
AQA-7 [20], MTL-AQA [22] and JIGSAWS [8]. Ex-periments results demonstrate our method largely outper-forms the state-of-the-art on the three benchmarks under the
Spearman’s Rank Correlation (81.0% to 84.0% on AQA-7, 92.7% to 95.1% on MTL-AQA and 70% to 85% on
JIGSAWS) and new proposed R-(cid:96)2 metric, which clearly shows the advantages of our proposed contrastive regres-sion framework. 2.