Abstract
We present GTT-Net, a supervised learning framework for the reconstruction of sparse dynamic 3D geometry. We build on a graph-theoretic formulation of the generalized trajectory triangulation problem, where non-concurrent multi-view imaging geometry is known but global image se-quencing is not provided. GTT-Net learns pairwise affini-ties modeling the spatio-temporal relationships among our input observations and leverages them to determine 3D ge-ometry estimates. Experiments reconstructing 3D motion-capture sequences show GTT-Net outperforms the state of the art in terms of accuracy and robustness. Within the context of articulated motion reconstruction, our proposed architecture is 1) able to learn and enforce semantic 3D motion priors for shared training and test domains, while being 2) able to generalize its performance across different training and test domains. Moreover, GTT-Net provides a computationally streamlined framework for trajectory tri-angulation with applications to multi-instance reconstruc-tion and event segmentation. 1.

Introduction
Trajectory triangulation aims to estimate multi-view sparse dynamic 3D geometry in the absence of concurrent observations. Recent advances in modeling and estimating the spatio-temporal relationships among 2D observations have yielded solutions with increasing generality and ef-fectiveness. However, such research efforts have focused on developing and exploiting geometric insights and for-mulations, relegating the analysis of higher-order semantic relationships among the geometric entities being estimated.
This work addresses the data-driven explicit characteriza-tion and modeling of these properties within the context of generalized trajectory triangulation.
Learning to encode generic spatio-temporal relationships hinges on the geometric reference being used and the scope of the analysis. The choice of geometric reference typically poses a dichotomy between Eulerian (e.g. field approach) vs. Lagrangian (e.g. particle approach) representations,
Figure 1: GTT-Net Workflow. Input camera poses and 2D features are mapped to a latent space encoding a pairwise affinity matrix leveraged to estimate 3D geometry. where the former defines interactions among rigidly struc-tured adjacency-based neighborhoods (e.g. voxel laticces), the latter defines interactions based on generic notions of proximity (e.g. nearest-neighbor graphs). Although scope is tightly coupled to these interaction mechanisms, the effi-ciency vs. comprehensiveness trade-offs between local and global analysis, determine the efficacy of the learned mod-els and representations. We target a discrete-continuous local-global middle ground by 1) learning to approximate pairwise affinities over all estimated geometric elements, through 2) the use of sparse continuous convolutions.
Along these lines, the recent framework for generalized trajectory triangulation (GTT) described in [40], poses the
estimation of such relationships in terms of the iterative continuous optimization of a graph-theoretic representation.
However, said optimization offers relatively slow conver-gence and provides no straightforward mechanisms for cod-ifying internal shape constraints or sequence-level motion priors. This work focuses on learning to synthesize a global shape affinity matrix directly from input 3D geometry to integrate with and leveraging the representation and formu-lation used in [40], see Fig. 1. Our contributions are:
• A learning-based solution to the joint reconstruction and sequencing problems from multi-view image capture.
• A generalizable learning and representation framework applicable across diverse input shape domains.
• An efficient and flexible cascaded training framework ap-plicable across diverse types of supervisory information. 2.