Abstract
Instance segmentation on point clouds is a fundamen-tal task in 3D scene perception. In this work, we propose a concise clustering-based framework named HAIS, which makes full use of spatial relation of points and point sets.
Considering clustering-based methods may result in over-segmentation or under-segmentation, we introduce the hi-erarchical aggregation to progressively generate instance proposals, i.e., point aggregation for preliminarily cluster-ing points to sets and set aggregation for generating com-plete instances from sets. Once the complete 3D instances are obtained, a sub-network of intra-instance prediction is adopted for noisy points ﬁltering and mask quality scoring.
HAIS is fast (only 410ms per frame on Titan X)) and does not require non-maximum suppression. It ranks 1st on the
ScanNet v2 benchmark 1, achieving the highest 69.9% AP50 and surpassing previous state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods by a large margin. Besides, the SOTA results on the S3DIS dataset validate the good generalization ability. Code is available at https://github.com/hustvl/HAIS. 1.

Introduction
With the rapid development and popularization of com-modity 3D sensors (Kinect, RealSense, Velodyne laser scanner, etc.), 3D scene understanding has become a hot research topic in the ﬁeld of computer vision.
Instance segmentation on point cloud, as the basic perception task of 3D scene understanding, is the technical foundation of a wide range of real-life applications, e.g., robotics, aug-mented/virtual reality, and autonomous driving.
Instance segmentation on 2D images has been exhaus-tively studied in the past few years [7, 24, 16, 27, 18, 4, 5, 1http://kaldir.vc.in.tum.de/scannet_benchmark/ semantic_instance_3d
†Xinggang Wang is the corresponding author.
Figure 1. An input point cloud, ground truth instance masks and 3D instance prediction results without & with hierarchical aggre-gation. As shown in the key region circled with red, for objects with large sizes and fragmentary point clouds, the predictions are easy to be over-segmented. The proposed hierarchical aggregation combines incomplete instances with fragments to form complete instance predictions. 11]. Top-down methods dominate 2D instance segmenta-tion. They ﬁrst generate instance-level proposals and then predict the mask for each proposal. Though existing 2D instance segmentation methods can be directly extended to 3D scenes, most existing 3D methods adopt a totally differ-ent bottom-up pipeline [42, 41, 22, 15, 20], which generates instances through clustering.
However, directly clustering a point cloud into multiple instances is very difﬁcult for the following reasons: (1) A point cloud usually contains a large number of points; (2)
The number of instances in a point cloud has large varia-tions for different 3D scenes; (3) The sizes of instances vary signiﬁcantly; (4) Each point has a very weak feature, i.e., 3D coordinate and color. The semantic gap between point and instance identity is huge. Thus, over-segmentation or under-segmentation are common problems and are prone to
exist.
We propose a hierarchical aggregation scheme in bottom-up 3D instance segmentation networks to cope with these problems. We ﬁrst aggregate points to sets with low bandwidth to avoid over-segmentation and then set aggre-gation with dynamic bandwidth is adopted to form com-plete instances. Set aggregation may absorb noisy point sets into predictions, making the aggregated instances over-complete. Thus, we design a sub-network for outlier ﬁl-tering and mask quality scoring. Based on the hierarchi-cal aggregation and the sub-network for intra-instance pre-diction, we propose a novel bottom-up framework, named
HAIS. HAIS achieves the state-of-the-art (SOTA) perfor-mance on both the ScanNet v2 benchmark [6] and the
S3DIS [1] dataset. Beyond this, HAIS is efﬁcient, only requiring a concise single-forward inference without any post-processing steps. Compared with all the existing meth-ods, HAIS takes the lowest inference latency.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows.
• We propose a novel bottom-up framework with the hierarchical aggregation for instance segmentation on 3D point cloud. The hierarchical aggregation strat-egy makes up the defects of bottom-up clustering. Be-sides, an intra-instance prediction network is designed for generating more ﬁne-grained instance predictions.
• Our method ranks 1st on the leaderboard of ScanNet v2 [6]. HAIS also achieves the state-of-the-art result on S3DIS [1]. We signiﬁcantly promote the perfor-mances on various challenging datasets and demon-strate the generalization of the proposed methods.
• Our method achieves the highest efﬁciency among all existing methods.
HAIS keeps a concise single-forward inference pipeline without any post-processing steps. The average per-frame inference time on ScanNet v2 is only 410 ms, much faster than other SOTA methods. 2.