Abstract
Image hiding aims to hide a secret image into a cover image in an imperceptible way, and then recover the secret image perfectly at the receiver end. Capacity, invisibility and security are three primary challenges in image hiding task. This paper proposes a novel invertible neural network (INN) based framework, HiNet, to simultaneously overcome the three challenges in image hiding. For large capacity, we propose an inverse learning mechanism by simultaneously learning the image concealing and revealing processes. Our method is able to achieve the concealing of a full-size secret image into a cover image with the same size. For high invis-ibility, instead of pixel domain hiding, we propose to hide the secret information in wavelet domain. Furthermore, we propose a new low-frequency wavelet loss to constrain that secret information is hidden in high-frequency wavelet sub-bands, which signiﬁcantly improves the hiding security. Ex-perimental results show that our HiNet signiﬁcantly outper-forms other state-of-the-art image hiding methods, with more than 10 dB PSNR improvement in secret image recovery on
ImageNet, COCO and DIV2K datasets. Codes are available at https://github.com/TomTomTommi/HiNet. 1.

Introduction
The task of image hiding is to conceal a secret image into a cover image to generate a stego image, which only allows the informed receivers to recover the secret image, but invisible to other people. For security concern, the stego image is usually required to be indistinguishable from the cover image. Different from bit-level message hiding or steganography [2, 20, 35, 36, 39–41], image hiding is more challenging, which requires large capacity, high invisibility and security. Image hiding has a wide range of applications, of which secret communication and privacy protection are the most signiﬁcant ones. Compared to the well-known im-*Authors contributed equally.
†Corresponding author. xsecret
Concealing 
Network xstego
Revealing 
Network xrec xsecret xrec (a) Traditional methods
Invertible Network xstego (b) Our method
Figure 1. The illustration of difference between our image hiding method and the traditional methods [5, 23, 32]. age cryptography, image hiding has a remarkable security advantage, i.e., the stego image with secret information in-side is indistinguishable from the cover image, which makes it more suitable for secret communication. In addition, un-like image cryptography, image hiding focuses more on the capacity and invisibility of hidden information rather than robustness.
Traditional steganographic approaches can only hide a small amount of information [6,11,13,16,19,24], which can-not meet the requirement of large capacity in image hiding task. Baluja [4] proposed the ﬁrst convolutional neural net-work (CNN) to solve image hiding problem. This work was then extended in [5] by permuting the pixels of secret image to enhance the hiding security. Weng et al. [32] further pro-posed a deep network for video steganography by temporal residual modeling. However, all these methods adopt two sub-networks for image hiding: a concealing network to hide a secret image xsecret into a cover image to generate a stego image xstego, and a revealing network to recover the secret image xrec from xstego, as shown in Fig. 1 (a). The con-cealing and revealing networks have two sets of parameters, which are linked through simple concatenation. This loose connection may cause color distortion and texture-copying artifacts. Besides, they barely consider the security issue, making hidden secret information easy to be detected.
In this paper, we propose an invertible image hiding net-work, HiNet, in which the concealing and revealing pro-cesses share the same set of network parameters, as shown in Fig. 1 (b). To the best of our knowledge, our work is the
ﬁrst attempt to explore invertible network in image hiding task. The main novelty is that image revealing is modelled as the reverse process of image concealing in an invertible network architecture, which means the network only needs to be trained once to get all network parameters for both con-cealing and revealing. This is a radical difference from the existing methods [5, 23, 32] which treat the concealing and revealing processes independently. Consequently, our HiNet achieves state-of-the-art performance on recovery accuracy, hiding security and invisibility. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel image hiding network, namely
HiNet, based on invertible neural network for the task of large-capacity image hiding.
• We design two concealing and revealing modules with differentiable and invertible property, aiming to make the image hiding process fully reversible.
• We propose a low-frequency wavelet loss to control the distribution of secret information in different frequency bands, which signiﬁcantly improves the hiding security. 2.