Abstract
This paper introduces HPNet, a novel deep-learning approach for segmenting a 3D shape represented as a point cloud into primitive patches.
The key to deep primitive segmentation is learning a feature representation that can separate points of different primitives. Unlike utilizing a single feature representation, HPNet leverages hybrid representations that combine one learned semantic descriptor, two spectral descriptors derived from predicted geometric parameters, as well as an adjacency matrix that encodes sharp edges. Moreover, instead of merely concatenating the descriptors, HPNet optimally combines hybrid representations by learning combination weights.
This weighting module builds on the entropy of input features.
The output primitive segmentation is obtained from a mean-shift clustering module. Experimental results on benchmark datasets ANSI and ABCParts show that HPNet leads to signiﬁcant performance gains from baseline approaches. 1.

Introduction
The geometry of man-made objects can be frequently analysed in terms of primitive surface patches (planes, spheres, cylinders, cones, and other simple parametric surfaces). Decomposing a 3D model into primitive surfaces is of fundamental importance with applications in reverse engineering, shape compression, shape understanding, shape editing, and robot learning. Primitive segmentation is the task of grouping and labeling points on an object based on primitive shape, and is fundamentally challenging due to the large search space and the fact that primitive patches may only approximately ﬁt the object.
This paper introduces a deep learning model called
HPNet. It takes as input a point cloud (optionally including normals) and outputs a segmentation of the point cloud into primitives, with a type label for each primitive segment (see Figure 1). The main idea of HPNet is to combine traditional tried-and-true geometric heuristics for primitive detection (for instance, algebraic relations between points and shape primitives, and segmentation from sharp edges) with a deep primitive detection approach based on powerful feature learning. We achieve this union through the use of
!"#$%
Figure 1: HPNet takes a point cloud as input and outputs detected primitive patches. It can handle diverse primitives at different scales. The detected primitives have smooth boundaries. a hybrid point descriptor that combines a learned semantic descriptor and two spectral descriptors. The ﬁrst spectral descriptor is derived from the adjacency matrix between the input points and predicted primitive parameters. The second spectral descriptor is built based on the adjacency matrix that models sharp edges. In both cases, the spectral approach uniﬁes all primitive segmentation cues as point descriptors. It also rectiﬁes the inputs to the spectral modules, e.g., incorrect predictions of primitive parameters. Given the point descriptors, HPNet employs a mean-shift clustering module to perform primitive segmentation. We also present an effective approach to train HPNet.
A key insight to succeed on a that allows HPNet wide diversity of input shapes is that different types of features have different power on different types of models.
For example, when planar shapes are prominent, spectral descriptors are very effective, as eigenvectors of edge-aware adjacency operators localize strongly on the planar patches
In contrast, the semantic and segment them robustly. descriptors are more useful for complex curved shapes, such as patches of cones and cylinders, in which local curvature information is sufﬁcient to determine the shape parameters.
HPNet exploits this insight by using adaptive weights to combine different types of features. A weighting module automatically computes the relative weighting for different types of descriptors, based on an entropy measure of each descriptor which estimates the importance of that descriptor for clustering.
We evaluate HPNet on two benchmark datasets, i.e.,
ANSI [14] and ABCParts [23]. With only points as input,
HPNet improves the Segmentation Mean IoU (MIoU) score from 80.9/75.0 to 91.3/78.1 on the ANSI and ABCParts benchmarks, respectively. With both positions and normals as input, HPNet improves the MIoU score from 88.6/82.1 to 94.2/85.2. We also perform an ablation study to justify the effectiveness of different components of HPNet. Our code is available at https://github.com/SimingYan/HPNet. 2.