Abstract
Few-shot semantic segmentation aims at learning to seg-ment a target object from a query image using only a few annotated support images of the target class. This challeng-ing task requires to understand diverse levels of visual cues and analyze fine-grained correspondence relations between the query and the support images. To address the problem, we propose Hypercorrelation Squeeze Networks (HSNet) that leverages multi-level feature correlation and efficient 4D convolutions. It extracts diverse features from different levels of intermediate convolutional layers and constructs a collection of 4D correlation tensors, i.e., hypercorrelations.
Using efficient center-pivot 4D convolutions in a pyramidal architecture, the method gradually squeezes high-level se-mantic and low-level geometric cues of the hypercorrelation into precise segmentation masks in coarse-to-fine manner.
The significant performance improvements on standard few-shot segmentation benchmarks of PASCAL-5i, COCO-20i, and FSS-1000 verify the efficacy of the proposed method. 1.

Introduction
The advent of deep convolutional neural networks [17, 20, 64] has promoted dramatic advances in many computer vision tasks including object tracking [28, 29, 45], visual correspondence [22, 44, 48], and semantic segmentation [7, 47, 62] to name a few. Despite the effectiveness of deep networks, their demand for a heavy amount of annotated examples from large-scale datasets [9, 11, 35] still remains a fundamental limitation since data labeling requires substan-tial human efforts, especially for dense prediction tasks, e.g., semantic segmentation. To cope with the challenge, there have been various attempts in semi- and weakly-supervised segmentation approaches [6, 26, 39, 66, 72, 77, 88] which in turn effectively alleviated the data-hunger issue. However, given only a few annotated training examples, the problem of poor generalization ability of the deep networks is yet the primary concern that many few-shot segmentation meth-ods [10, 12, 13, 19, 33, 36, 37, 46, 54, 61, 63, 69, 70, 74, 75, 80, 83, 86, 87, 89] struggle to address.
Figure 1: Our model performs visual reasoning in coarse-to-fine manner by gradually squeezing high-dimensional hypercorrelation to the target segmentation mask with efficient 4D convolutions.
In contrast, human visual system easily achieves gen-eralizing appearances of new objects given extremely lim-ited supervision. The crux of such intelligence lies at the ability in finding reliable correspondences across different instances of the same class. Recent work on semantic cor-respondence shows that leveraging dense intermediate fea-tures [38, 42, 44] and processing correlation tensors with high-dimensional convolutions [30, 58, 71] are significantly effective in establishing accurate correspondences. However, while recent few-shot segmentation research began active exploration in the direction of correlation learning, most of them [36, 37, 46, 65, 73, 75, 80] neither exploit diverse levels of feature representations from early to late layers of a CNN nor construct pair-wise feature correlations to cap-ture fine-grained correlation patterns. There have been some attempts [74, 86] in utilizing dense correlations with multi-level features, but they are yet limited in the sense that they simply employ the dense correlations for graph attention, using only a small fraction of intermediate conv layers.
In this work we combine the two of the most influen-tial techniques in recent research of visual correspondence, multi-level features and 4D convolutions, and deign a novel
framework, dubbed Hypercorrelation Squeeze Networks (HSNet), for the task of few-shot semantic segmentation.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, our network exploits diverse geo-metric/semantic feature representations from many differ-ent intermediate CNN layers to construct a collection of 4D correlation tensors, i.e., hypercorrelations, which rep-resent a rich set of correspondences in multiple visual as-pects. Following the work of FPN [34], we adapt pyramidal design to capture both high-level semantic and low-level geometric cues for precise mask prediction in coarse-to-fine manner using deeply stacked 4D conv layers. To reduce computational burden caused by such heavy use of high-dimensional convs, we devise an efficient 4D kernel via rea-sonable weight-sparsification which enables real-time infer-ence while being more effective and light-weight than the ex-isting ones. The improvements on standard few-shot segmen-tation benchmarks of PASCAL-5i [61], COCO-20i [35], and
FSS-1000 [33] verify the efficacy of the proposed method. 2.