Abstract
The hyperspectral image (HSI) denoising has been widely utilized to improve HSI qualities. Recently, learning-based HSI denoising methods have shown their effective-ness, but most of them are based on synthetic dataset and lack the generalization capability on real testing HSI. More-over, there is still no public paired real HSI denoising dataset to learn HSI denoising network and quantitatively evaluate HSI methods. In this paper, we mainly focus on how to produce realistic dataset for learning and evaluat-ing HSI denoising network. On the one hand, we collect a paired real HSI denoising dataset, which consists of short-exposure noisy HSIs and the corresponding long-exposure clean HSIs. On the other hand, we propose an accurate
HSI noise model which matches the distribution of real data well and can be employed to synthesize realistic dataset.
On the basis of the noise model, we present an approach to calibrate the noise parameters of the given hyperspec-tral camera. The extensive experimental results show that a network learned with only synthetic data generated by our noise model performs as well as it is learned with paired real data. Our code and data are available at: https:
//github.com/ColinTaoZhang/HSIDwRD. (a) Input (PSNR) (b) Complex [16] (30.59) (c) Ours Real (33.60) (d) Ours Synthetic (34.22)
Figure 1. A scene from our collected HSI dataset, and we show the spectral band in 550 nm. (a) The input noisy image; (b) The out-put of CNN trained with synthetic dataset generated by complex noise model [16]; (c) The output of CNN trained with our collected paired real dataset; (d) The output of CNN trained with synthetic dataset generated by our noise model, which is comparable with (c) the result trained with paired real dataset and obviously outper-forms synthetics dataset generated by complex noise model. 1.

Introduction processing.
Hyperspectral image (HSI) can provide much more spec-tral information than RGB image, and is beneﬁcial to nu-merous applications, including remote sensing [6,35], com-puter vision [7], medical diagnosis [5, 32] and more. Hy-perspectral imaging is to capture spectral information of each spatial position in a scene with massive wavebands, and the commercial hyperspectral cameras often utilize the scanning design [4, 39]. These make its photon counts for each band are much less than that in RGB image, and vari-ous noises are easily introduced into the acquisition process.
This kind of degradation negatively inﬂuences not only the visual appearance of the HSI but also the performance of all downstream HSI applications [14]. Thus, HSI denois-ing is an essential step in the pipeline of HSI analysis and
∗Corresponding author: fuying@bit.edu.cn
To remove the imaging noise, the well-known model-based HSI denoising methods often iteratively solve an op-timization problem with various hand-crafted priors, such as smoothness [50], self-similarity [20, 21] and so on.
Nevertheless, the iterative optimization procedure is time-consuming and the hand-crafted priors cannot sufﬁciently represent the variety of data in the real world. Instead of costly optimization and hand-crafted priors, learning-based methods [9, 19, 29, 45, 51] automatically learn the mapping from noisy HSI to clean HSI with convolutional neural net-work (CNN). However, existing learning-based methods generally rely on training dataset synthesized with simple
Gaussian noise model or complex noise models [16, 45].
Promising results on synthetic data notwithstanding, these methods still cannot well work and evaluate on the real data, due to lacking realistic HSI data.
There are two ways to solve this problem. One is to capture paired real data for HSI denoising network learn-ing and evaluation, like those for RGB image denoising
[1, 12, 13, 26, 38]. But collecting abundant high-quality real data for learning HSI denoising network is obviously ex-pensive and requires a large amount of labor. The other is to generate realistic paired data. This is convenient and in-expensive, but it lies in how accurate the noise formulation model of real HSI is. The heteroscedastic Gaussian noise model [2] approximates the noise occurred in HSI better than the commonly-used homoscedastic one. Nevertheless, it cannot delineate the full picture of sensor noise in the HSI.
Actually, due to the physical characteristics of hyperspec-tral camera, e.g., scanning the scene in spatial or spectral domain [4, 39], the captured HSI contains more complex noise than heteroscedastic Gaussian noise, as shown in Fig-ure 2.
In this paper, we mainly focus on how to capture realistic data for learning HSI denoising network, including paired real dataset and high-quality synthetic data performing as well as real data, as shown in Figure 1. To the best of our knowledge, there is no public dataset for training and test-ing HSI denoising methods with diverse real world data and ground truth. Therefore, we ﬁrst collect a real dataset of noisy HSI captured with short exposure time and each noisy
HSI has a corresponding long-exposure clean HSI, which is beneﬁcial to the follow-up noise model formulation and de-noising method evaluation. Then, we propose an accurate noise model for HSI, which can formulate the distribution of real data well. In addition, we calibrate the parameter of the formulated noise model, and the calibrated noise model can be utilized to synthesize realistic HSI denoising dataset.
Finally, we employ the generated synthetic dataset to learn a CNN for HSI denoising. Extensive experiments show that the HSI denoising network learned with only synthetic data generated with our noise model can reach the HSI denoising performance as well as that trained with real data.
In summary, our main contributions are that we
• Collect the ﬁrst real dataset with paired noisy and clean
HSIs, which will be publicly released to facilitate fur-ther researches;
• Formulate a noise model to synthesize realistic noisy
HSI, which can match the distribution of real noisy data;
• Present a noise parameter estimation approach to cal-ibrate the noise parameter of the given hyperspectral camera. 2.