Abstract image classification, person identification, etc.
Most existing image de-raining networks could only learn fixed mapping rules between paired rainy/clean im-ages on single synthetic dataset and then stay static for lifetime. However, since single synthetic dataset merely provides a partial view for the distribution of rain streaks, deep models well trained on an individual synthetic dataset tend to overfit on this biased distribution. This leads to the inability of these methods to well generalize to com-plex and changeable real-world rainy scenes, thus lim-iting their practical applications.
In this paper, we try for the first time to accumulate the de-raining knowledge from multiple synthetic datasets on a single network pa-rameter set to improve the de-raining generalization of deep networks. To achieve this goal, we explore Neu-ral Reorganization (NR) to allow the de-raining network to keep a subtle stability-plasticity trade-off rather than naive stabilization after training phase. Specifically, we design our NR algorithm by borrowing the synaptic con-solidation mechanism in the biological brain and knowl-edge distillation. Equipped with our NR algorithm, the deep model can be trained on a list of synthetic rainy datasets by overcoming catastrophic forgetting, making it a general-version de-raining network. Extensive experi-mental validation shows that due to the successful accumu-lation of de-raining knowledge, our proposed method can not only process multiple synthetic datasets consistently, but also achieve state-of-the-art results when dealing with real-world rainy images. 1.

Introduction
In recent years, deep learning models have achieved sig-nificant progress on single image de-raining task [32, 6, 4, 34, 43, 13, 50, 41, 28, 5, 42, 39, 33, 18]. This task aims to recover the clean image from its rain-polluted version, benefiting subsequent downstream computer vision tasks
[16, 2, 19, 15, 31, 46, 26, 49, 25], e.g., object detection,
*Corresponding author. †Co-first authors contributed equally
Figure 1: Visual comparison between the state-of-the-art
PreNet and our Neural Reorganization on real-world rainy scene with heavy and light rain. The red check mark indi-cates that the network successfully works on it. Specifically, it is clear that our proposed Neural Reorganization scheme is capable of dealing with various real-world rainy scenes (i.e., heavy and light rain). While the original PreNet could only take effect on specific type of rain streak and fail on untouched type of training stage.
While existing methods obtain promising results, most of them only focus on learning specific mapping rules on the given individual synthetic rainy dataset. They may suf-fer from severe performance degradation when applying to real-world scenes, as the learned specific mapping rule on given individual synthetic rainy dataset is incapable of describing them. As shown in Figure 1, taking the state-of-the-art de-raining network PreNet [29] for example, we first train PreNet on the given light rainy dataset Rain100L
[38] and then test it on the collected real-world rainy sam-ples from the Real-Internet dataset [35]. It is clear that the trained PreNet only works well on light rainy scene and fails to remove rain-streaks on heavy rainy samples (Case 1). Similarly, when trained on the given heavy rainy dataset
Rain100H [38], the trained PreNet suffers from severe ar-tifacts (Case 2) as shown in red box. Therefore, how to obtain a general-version image de-raining network (GID), which can tackle various types of rain streaks with a sin-gle set of parameters and generalizing well to complex real-world rainy scenes, has attracted more and more attention.
Inspired by high-level computer vision tasks, e.g., im-age classification, a straightforward strategy to solve the above issue is to train a deep network by mixing multi-ple types of synthetic rainy datasets. However, this mix-up strategy is exposed to the following weaknesses: 1. The gradient from each task pulls the solution towards its op-timum and the result is an equilibrium between the gra-dients of different tasks [10]. Since the contribution of each individual dataset to the total loss varies greatly, the optimization algorithm inclines to overlook the disadvan-taged member of the mixed datasets. The biased alloca-tion leads to undesirable performance when facing complex real-world scenes. 2. This mixing strategy leads to low computational efficiency in practice. Specifically, when a new dataset is introduced, the approach requires to remix all these datasets and retrain network from scratch. On the other hand, training the network on a chronological se-quence of synthetic datasets rather than mixed datasets also acts as a possible approach to achieve GID. The main is-sue of the de-raining model regarding sequentially learning is that it is prone to catastrophic forgetting or catastrophic interference [27], i.e., training a model with new informa-tion interferes with previously learned knowledge. Alter-natively, some researchers [21, 24, 20, 36, 43] focus on domain adaption between synthetic and real-world scenes.
However, these methods could only learn specific one-to-one cross-domain mapping rules between individual syn-thetic dataset and real-world rainy images. When applying to multiple synthetic rainy datasets, these methods are inca-pable of learning the many-to-many mapping rules between all the synthetic domains and real-world one in a single net-work. Besides, all of them require the collection of a large number of real-world samples during the training phase.
Although individual synthetic dataset only provides a partial view, combining multiple local views is conducive to inferring the panorama. If the de-raining model can make reasonable use of these multi-view datasets, it may gain re-markable promotion on generalization ability. However, ex-isting methods [45, 40, 34, 29, 22, 17, 47, 38, 8] mainly fucus on designing more effective architecture of network to achieve better performance on single synthetic dataset.
The de-raining networks obtained by the above methods
If the resembles a static entity of de-raining knowledge. de-raining knowledge is directly extended without targeting the original dataset, it will lead to the catastrophic forget-ting problem [3]. To address the above issues, in this paper, we propose a novel Neural Reorganization (NR), a brain-inspired scheme to endow the de-raining network with a dy-namic stability-plasticity trade-off rather than naively pure stability after training phase. Specifically, we borrow the synaptic consolidation mechanism in the biological brain and knowledge distillation to design our NR algorithm. In this way, our NR algorithm enables the deep network to be trained on a list of synthetic rainy datasets by over-coming catastrophic forgetting. Therefore, the final trained network could aggregate de-raining knowledge from mul-tiple datasets. In addition to improving the generalization ability on real-world rainy images, the trained network can also maintain considerable performance on all the synthetic datasets. Our main contributions are as follows: 1) To our best knowledge, it is the first attempt to in-troduce brain-inspired mechanism to improve the im-age de-raining generalization issue. Compared with mainstream transfer learning methods, our proposed method only requires synthetic rainy datasets that are easily accessible. 2) Inspired by learning and memory mechanism in the biological brain, we first propose Neural Reorganiza-tion. Our proposed algorithm facilitates a de-raining network to effectively accumulate de-raining knowl-edge from a continuous stream of correlated data by overcoming catastrophic forgetting. 3) Since our proposed NR algorithm is orthogonal to the mainstream de-raining methods focusing on the net-work architectures, it can be directly applied to these methods to improve the generalization ability. 4) Extensive experiments demonstrate that a single net-work trained with our proposed scheme can process multiple synthetic datasets consistently and achieve state-of-the-art results over real-world rainy scenes. In addition, we believe that our NR can provide a new perspective for other related low-level vision tasks in terms of improving generalization ability. 2.