Abstract 1.

Introduction
We present a method for reconstructing the 3D shape of underwater environments from a single, stationary camera placed above the water. We propose a novel differentiable framework, which, to our knowledge, is the ﬁrst single-camera solution that is capable of simultaneously retrieving the structure of dynamic water surfaces and static underwa-ter scene geometry in the wild. This framework integrates ray casting of Snell’s law at the refractive interface, multi-view triangulation and specially designed loss functions.
Our method is calibration-free, and thus it is easy to col-lect data outdoors in uncontrolled environments. Experi-mental results show that our method is able to realize robust and quality reconstructions on a variety of scenes, both in a laboratory environment and in the wild, and even in a salt water environment. We believe the method is promising for applications in surveying and environmental monitoring.
Shallow waters in rivers, lakes, and oceanfronts are im-portant sites both for their ecosystems, as well as for their economic signiﬁcance. Environmental monitoring and sur-veying of these shallow water regions is therefore a task of comparable importance. Unfortunately, detailed 3D scan-ning of such environments is currently cumbersome, since it requires placing cameras or 3D scanners under water, which incurs signiﬁcant equipment costs, and results in slow ac-quisition time.
A more convenient solution would be to 3D image the environment directly from above water. This is a rather challenging problem, since the ﬂuid, acting as a transmit-ting medium, is unknown and usually non-stationary. The refraction changes dynamically, and causes a time-varying distortion of the underwater scene. While there has been some work on this problem over the years [26, 36, 1, 11], the state of the art methods require extensive calibration and
work primarily in laboratory settings.
In contrast, our method requires no calibration and works
“in the wild”. We are able to reconstruct underwater geom-etry up to a global scale factor, using a single, stationary camera. The distortions from the moving water surface pro-vide a changing parallax for each point on the underwater surface. If this parallax is known, it can be used to triangu-late the underwater geometry.
We utilize this observation by jointly estimating both the underwater geometry and the dynamic shape of the water surface (Fig. 1). To this end, we propose a novel differ-entiable framework governed by ray casting, Snell’s law at the refractive interface, and multi-view triangulation, to tie together all parameters in an integrated image formation model. With our speciﬁcally designed loss function, we can progressively and simultaneously optimize the structures of water surfaces and scene geometry to ﬁt the model. Our method is calibration-free and uses only a video sequence as input. Speciﬁcally, we make the following contributions:
•
•
•
We establish a connection between the distorted pat-terns observed by a single camera and the time-varying
ﬂuid structures and the underwater 3D scene geometry.
We formulate a differentiable framework to recon-struct unknown dynamic water surfaces and scene ge-ometry simultaneously with a specially constructed objective function.
We demonstrate our method on a variety of synthetic and real scenes. The real scenes are conducted both in the lab and in the wild. We even test the method over seawater. 2.