Abstract
Communication between embodied AI agents has re-ceived increasing attention in recent years. Despite its use, it is still unclear whether the learned communication is inter-pretable and grounded in perception. To study the grounding of emergent forms of communication, we first introduce the collaborative multi-object navigation task ‘CoMON.’ In this task, an ‘oracle agent’ has detailed environment information in the form of a map. It communicates with a ‘navigator agent’ that perceives the environment visually and is tasked to find a sequence of goals. To succeed at the task, effective communication is essential. CoMON hence serves as a basis to study different communication mechanisms between het-erogeneous agents, that is, agents with different capabilities and roles. We study two common communication mecha-nisms and analyze their communication patterns through an egocentric and spatial lens. We show that the emergent communication can be grounded to the agent observations and the spatial structure of the 3D environment. 1.

Introduction
Research in embodied AI agents that learn to perceive, act, and communicate within 3D environments has become popular in recent years [3, 6, 9]. Collaboration between multiple agents has also received an increasing amount of attention. Consequently, there has been renewed interest in studying communication mechanisms that increase the effectiveness of collaborative agents [42].
A key goal of communication is to transmit informa-tion. Therefore, to analyze communication it is common to study collaborative tasks where agents have heterogeneous abilities or asymmetric access to information [10, 40]. A heterogeneous agent setup also corresponds to real-world scenarios such as guiding a delivery driver to our home
*denotes equal contribution by SP, SW, and UJ
Figure 1. We propose a collaborative multi-object navigation task (CoMON) where an oracle agent AO communicates with a nav-igator agent AN . The oracle AO possesses a global map and the navigator AN needs to perceive and navigate a 3D environ-ment to find a sequence of goal objects while avoiding collisions.
Through this task, we study the impact of structured and unstruc-tured communication mechanisms on navigation performance, and the emergence of messages grounded in egocentric perception. over a phone call. However, prior work on emergent com-munication has adopted simplified settings like reference games [5, 43] or agents communicating within 2D environ-ments [10]. Work involving communication in 3D envi-ronments has focused on whether communication can lead to improved performance through cooperation in solving the task [32–34], rather than detailed interpretation of the emergent communication patterns. Despite this rich litera-ture studying emergent communication, there has been no systematic analysis and interpretation of emergent commu-nication in realistic 3D environments.
In this paper, we focus on interpreting emergent communi-cation through an egocentric and spatially grounded analysis.
To do this, we define a collaborative multi-object navigation task (CoMON), which extends the recently proposed multi-object navigation (MultiON) task [64]. The CoMON task requires a pair of agents—an oracle with privileged knowl-edge of the environment in the form of a map, and a navigator who can perceive and navigate the environment—to com-municate with each other in order for the navigator to find and reach a sequence of goal objects (see Figure 1). The primary role of this task is to study the emergent communi-cation between heterogeneous agents in visually realistic 3D environments.
We conduct a rigorous comparison and interpretation of two families of communication mechanisms: unstruc-tured and structured communication. The first is commonly adopted in non-visual RL settings [25, 46] and corresponds to the ‘continuous communication’ of DIAL by Foerster et al.
[25]. The latter introduces an inductive bias by imposing a discrete message structure and has been adopted by the
Embodied AI community [33, 34].
We find that: 1) structured communication can achieve higher navigation performance than unstructured commu-nication; 2) agents using structured communication come close to matching the success rate of ‘oracle’ communication but are less efficient; 3) interpretable messages akin to ‘I am looking for the red goal’ emerge in both communication mechanisms; and 4) both communication mechanisms lead to the emergence of egocentrically-grounded messages such as ‘goal is close in front of you,’ and ‘goal is behind you.’ 2.