Abstract
We propose IntraTomo, a powerful framework that com-bines the benefits of learning-based and model-based ap-proaches for solving highly ill-posed inverse problems in the
Computed Tomography (CT) context. IntraTomo is composed of two core modules: a novel sinogram prediction module, and a geometry refinement module, which are applied it-eratively.
In the first module, the unknown density field is represented as a continuous and differentiable function, parameterized by a deep neural network. This network is learned, in a self-supervised fashion, from the incomplete or/and degraded input sinogram. After getting estimated through the sinogram prediction module, the density field is consistently refined in the second module using local and non-local geometrical priors. With these two core modules, we show that IntraTomo significantly outperforms existing approaches on several ill-posed inverse problems, such as limited angle tomography with a range of 45 degrees, sparse view tomographic reconstruction with as few as eight views, or super-resolution tomography with eight times increased resolution. The experiments on simulated and real data show that our approach can achieve results of unprecedented quality. 1.

Introduction
Computed tomography (CT) is a powerful imaging tool that enables the examination of internal structures of the scanned object in a non-destructive and non-invasive manner.
The computed tomography technique is often associated with medical X-ray tomography. However, it has numerous other applications at different scales and involving various techniques to produce the projections such as: industrial
X-ray CT [17, 69], synchrotron X-ray tomographic mi-croscopy [19, 56], electron tomography microscopy [46] and visible light tomography [31, 70]. Tomography techniques operate on a set of projections of the scanned object from different angles. Reconstruction algorithms are applied to retrieve a density field representing the object from these projections. Mathematically, the reconstruction process is an
Figure 1. (a) Taking a limited angles CT measurements as input, (b) our proposed method successfully restores the 3D density field with both high-frequency details and geometric structures for a Covid19 patient (covid19-A-0070) [30]. (c) A comparison with other SOTA approaches using PSNR and SSIM metrics. A stochastic model-based approach [13] (Stochastic) fails to retrieve the field’s boundary (red box). Deep shape image prior [23, 62] (Deep prior) struggles to reconstruct fine details (black box). inverse problem with Nv unknowns (number of pixels/voxels representing the object) calculated using the Nθ ×Np known parameters (number of projections times the number of pix-els for each projection).
Ideally, the acquisition process provides a large number of projections that are uniformly sampled over the angular space.
However, in several applications, the data is captured for a limited number of projections or using a non-uniform angular sampling. For example, in medical CT, reducing the number of projections is employed as means to reduce the dosage of the X-ray radiation. On the other hand, in tilt-series electron tomography microscopy, the scanned sample can only be rotated for a limited range of angles, which results in a non-uniform angular sampling and a corresponding loss of resolu-tion in the axial direction, also known as the “missing wedge problem”. The former acquisition scenario is known as sparse-view tomography, while the latter is known as limited-angle tomography. These two scenarios illustrate examples where the tomography problem becomes highly ill-posed and underdetermined. In such scenarios, the commonly used analytical reconstruction Filtered Back-Projection (FBP) and its 3D variant FDK [21] become obsolete. Two families of approaches have been proposed in the literature to deal with the ill-posedness in those scenarios. The first one is the model-based optimization approaches that introduce non-linear regularizers (priors) [42, 73, 67, 20] to compensate for the missing information. These methods typically employ iterative solvers like the Algebraic Reconstruction Technique (ART) and its variants. They are flexible and achieve good results. However, they are memory-hungry and require substantial computational time. More recently, a second family of approaches emerged with the rise of deep learning techniques. For specific applications and scenarios, these approaches achieve outstanding performance [4, 45, 35].
Nevertheless, for supervised learning methods [2], the time for training and the difficulty in collecting enough labeled training data are issues in most applications.
In conventional deep learning applications to image analy-sis, the neural networks (NNs) are trained and tuned using ar-rays of pixels to represent the images. However, recent stud-ies [54, 50] show that NN based approaches fail to recover the high frequency details of the targets [48, 50, 53, 60], since a rapid decay can be observed for the eigenvalue spectrum of these networks, which is called “spectral bias”
[60, 54, 6]. To overcome the limitation of these biases, some coordinate-based neural approaches were proposed
[50, 18, 7, 58]. By such powerful representations, a natural continuous version of an unknown target can be provided.
We incorporate recent coordinate-based neural ap-proaches [50, 60], which act as a sinogram prediction prior, into our forward-backward optimization framework [8] called IntraTomo. By combining the sinogram prediction prior and geometric refinement priors, we successfully com-bine the benefits of model-based and data-driven techniques for tackling various tomographic imaging tasks.
In summary, the main contributions of our proposed ap-proach are:
• We propose a novel self-supervised tomographic recon-struction framework that only uses the object’s own projections as training data. We are the first to suc-cessfully combine the benefits of learning-based and model-based approaches in a self-supervised fashion.
• We show state-of-the-art results on several challenging ill-posed tomography problems: limited angle tomog-raphy, sparse view tomography, and super-resolution tomography. We validate our improvements compar-ing to multiple state-of-the-art baseline methods using quantitative and qualitative metrics on a wide range of 2D and 3D, simulated and real CT data.
• We demonstrate our framework’s ability to solve in-verse problems in the projections space, such as sino-gram extrapolation, inpainting, super-resolution and denoising.
• The code and data are publicly available1. 2.