Abstract
We tackle data-driven 3D point cloud registration. Given point correspondences, the standard Kabsch algorithm pro-vides an optimal rotation estimate. This allows to train registration models in an end-to-end manner by differen-tiating the SVD operation. However, given the initial rota-tion estimate supplied by Kabsch, we show we can improve point correspondence learning during model training by ex-tending the original optimization problem.
In particular, we linearize the governing constraints of the rotation ma-trix and solve the resulting linear system of equations. We then iteratively produce new solutions by updating the ini-tial estimate. Our experiments show that, by plugging our differentiable layer to existing learning-based registration methods, we improve the correspondence matching qual-ity. This yields up to a 7% decrease in rotation error for correspondence-based data-driven registration methods. 1.

Introduction
Finding a geometrical transformation that aligns two point sets is at the core of several down-stream tasks such as range data fusion [20], ego- or object pose track-ing [15, 17, 46], 3D shape completion [16] and camera re-localization [1]. This challenging problem has a long-standing research history [14, 36, 2, 35, 26], as the corre-spondence between point clouds is usually not known, or it may not even explicitly exist. Other challenges include the fact that 3D sensors often observe object or scene surfaces only partially, that the density of scans varies with respect to the distance from the sensor, and that point clouds are usually corrupted by severe noise and outliers.
Existing optimization-based methods typically solve point cloud registration by finding a transformation that minimizes the distance between two point sets, according to some criterion, e.g., Chamfer distance [12]. Their per-formance critically depends on the quality of the 3D point correspondences between the point sets [21, 33, 32, 22, 45,
Figure 1. We propose a novel, differentiable rotation estimator.
Given a trainable, correspondence-based registration method and initial rotation estimate (by, e.g., Kabsch algorithm), our iterative rotation estimator performs a series of pose refinements to pro-duce gradients that guide the matching network towards improving point correspondences. 43, 9]. To cope with the limitations of prior heuristic ap-proaches, recent methods [45, 43, 9, 8, 7, 15, 18] leverage the representational power of deep neural networks to learn an estimate of the transformation that aligns point clouds in an end-to-end manner.
To ensure that the estimated matrix is a valid rigid transformation matrix, state-of-the-art learning-based meth-ods [38, 44, 5] employ the Kabsch algorithm [14] and thus need to differentiate through the SVD operation [28]. Kab-sch produces globally optimal estimates for a given set of correspondences. However, if the point matches are not perfect, we can design other pose oriented geometric incen-tives to guide the correspondence network to learn better matches.
To this end, we formulate a local approximation of the correspondence distance minimization problem and show that this helps the network to produce better correspon-dences. Our method takes the estimate produced by Kabsch as input and it performs a number of recurrent iterative steps that over time push the matching network to improve corre-spondence matching quality (see Figure 1). As rotation ma-trices are governed by non-linear constraints, we propose a linearization of these constraints around the computed ini-tial estimate and solve the optimization problem using the method of Lagrange multipliers. The result is a linear sys-tem of equations, where the new rotation estimate can be ex-tracted in closed-form. This estimate is recurrently refined over a fixed number of iterations, akin to the classic ap-proach from Drummond and Cipolla [11]. In comparison to
Kabsch, the use of linearized constraints makes our estima-tor increasingly sensitive to particular geometric configura-tions of point clouds, that result in estimates that might di-verge from the original Kabsch estimates. We discuss these configurations in more detail in the supplementary mate-rial. However, Kabsch also benefits from a network that is encouraged to prevent these particular configurations.
We show experimentally that our approach is an add-on module that can be used in combination with different learning-based methods for point cloud registration, such as
Deep Closest Point [38] and RPM-Net [44]. We improve on the results of two state-of-the-art methods, in a registration task on the ModelNet40 [39] dataset. Moreover, we show that when using our layer, there is no need to impose an additional loss that aids the matching network (as used in, e.g., RPM-Net [44]), as the correspondences improve dur-ing the training implicitly. In summary, our contributions are the following: i) We propose a novel, differentiable ro-tation estimation layer that promotes the trainable matching network to improve correspondence matching quality; ii)
We show that this differentiable rotation estimator can be obtained by linearizing the governing constraints for rota-tion matrices around the initial solution in an iterative fash-ion, resulting in linear constrained optimization problem with closed-form solution; iii) We augment two state-of-the-art deep global registration methods with our layer and improve upon them in the task of point cloud registration on the ModelNet40 benchmark. Our module can improve learning-based registration methods, at the minimal cost of adding a parameter-free layer during training.1 2.