Abstract
Siamese tracking has achieved groundbreaking perfor-mance in recent years, where the essence is the efﬁcient matching operator cross-correlation and its variants. Be-sides the remarkable success, it is important to note that the heuristic matching network design relies heavily on ex-pert experience. Moreover, we experimentally ﬁnd that one sole matching operator is difﬁcult to guarantee stable track-ing in all challenging environments. Thus, in this work, we introduce six novel matching operators from the perspec-tive of feature fusion instead of explicit similarity learn-ing, namely Concatenation, Pointwise-Addition, Pairwise-Relation, FiLM, Simple-Transformer and Transductive-Guidance, to explore more feasibility on matching oper-ator selection. The analyses reveal these operators’ se-lective adaptability on different environment degradation types, which inspires us to combine them to explore comple-mentary features. To this end, we propose binary channel manipulation (BCM) to search for the optimal combination of these operators. BCM determines to retrain or discard one operator by learning its contribution to other track-ing steps. By inserting the learned matching networks to a strong baseline tracker Ocean [47], our model achieves fa-vorable gains by 67.2 → 71.4, 52.6 → 58.3, 70.3 → 76.0 success on OTB100, LaSOT, and TrackingNet, respectively.
Notably, Our tracker, dubbed AutoMatch, uses less than half of training data/time than the baseline tracker, and runs at 50 FPS using PyTorch. Code and model are released at https://github.com/JudasDie/SOTS. 1.

Introduction
Generic object tracking, aiming to infer the location and scale of an arbitrary object in a video sequence, is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision [16, 21, 25, 33].
The recent prevailing Siamese methods [3, 6, 11, 18, 41, 42,
Email: zhangzhipeng2017@ia.ac.cn
† Corresponding authors.
Ours
SiamRPN++
Ocean
Figure 1: Comparisons of our approach with depth-wise cross-correlation based trackers SiamRPN++ [18] and
Ocean [47]. Our model, employing the automatically searched matching networks, can better handle different challenging factors, e.g., distractor in the ﬁrst video, occlu-sion and scale change of the second one, background clutter and fast motion of the third sequence. 47], decompose the tracking problem into a relation learn-ing task and a state estimation task. In the former case, the goal is to measure the similarity between exemplar and can-didate (search) images. The second task, which is normally comprised of foreground classiﬁcation and scale regression
[8, 18, 47], is followed to estimate the target state.
Fuelled by the emergence of object detection that fa-cilitates bounding box regression, the network design for state estimation has substantially advanced in recent years
[6, 8, 19, 41, 47]. However, the advancements in relation learning have been limited. Previous works generally per-form relation learning with heuristically designed matching operators. Concretely, the seminal work SiamFC [3] em-ploys cross-correlation to model the relation between exem-plar and candidate images. The follow-ups propose upchan-nel cross-correlation [19] and depthwise cross-correlation
[18] to learn ﬁne-grained feature similarities. Besides their it is important to note that the heuristic great success,
matching network design requires substantial effort of hu-man experts, and it is extremely difﬁcult to guarantee ro-bustness in all challenging environments, as experimentally veriﬁed in Fig. 1 and Tab. 1. One straightforward solution is to ﬁnd the optimal matching operator under various circum-stances, which is however obviously tedious and impracti-cal. Hence, it is natural to throw a question: can we search for a general matching network for Siamese tracking?
In this work, we show the answer is afﬁrmative by proposing a search algorithm for automatic matching net-work design. Instead of adopting the conventional cross-correlation and its variants, we explore more feasibil-ity of matching operator selection. Speciﬁcally, besides cross-correlation, we introduce six novel matching opera-tors to Siamese tracking, namely Concatenation, Pointwise-Addition, Pairwise-Relation, FiLM, Simple-Transformer and Transductive-Guidance. We shed light on the intrin-sic differences of these operators by comparing their per-formances under different environment degradation types.
Surprisingly, by simply replacing the cross-correlation to concatenation, the strong baseline tracker Ocean [47] achieves 1.2 points gains on success score of OTB100 [40] (see Tab. 1). Moreover, we observed that the matching op-erators show different resilience on various challenging fac-tors and image contents. This inspires us to combine them to exploit complementary informative features.
To this end, we propose a search algorithm, namely Bi-nary Channel Manipulation (BCM), to automatically select and combine matching operators. Firstly, we construct a search space with the aforementioned seven operators. The exemplar and candidate images pass through all matching operators to generate the corresponding response maps. For each response channel, we assign it with a learnable manip-ulator to indicate its contribution for other tracking steps.
Gumbel-Softmax [37] is applied to discretize the manipu-lators as binary decision, as well as guarantee the differ-entiable training. Then, we aggregate manipulators of all channels to identify the operator’s potential for adapting to the baseline tracker. Our search algorithm aims to ﬁnd the matching networks with better generalization on different tracking environments. Thus, the performance on the val-idation set is treated as the reward or ﬁtness. Concretely, we solve the search algorithm using bilevel optimization, which ﬁnds the optimal manipulators on the validation set with the weight of other layers (e.g., convolution kernels) learned on the training data. Notably, we simultaneously predict matching networks for both the classiﬁcation and re-gression branches in state estimation. The different search results for classiﬁcation and regression demonstrate that our method is capable of ﬁnding task-dependent match-ing networks. Finally, we integrate the learned matching networks into the baseline tracker [47] and train it follow-ing the standard Siamese procedure.
The effectiveness of the proposed framework is veriﬁed on OTB100 [40], LaSOT [10], GOT10K [14], TrackingNet
[27] and TNL2K [39]. Our approach surpasses the baseline tracker [47] on all ﬁve benchmarks. It is worth noting that the proposed tracker also outperforms the recent online up-dating methods DiMP [4] and KYS [5] on all criteria of the evaluated datasets.
The main contributions of this work are twofold.
A systematic analysis reveals that
• We introduce six novel matching operators for Siamese the tracking. commonly-used (depthwise) cross-correlation is not a requisite, and an appropriate matching operator can fur-ther bring remarkable performance gains.
• A conceptually simple algorithm, namely Binary Chan-nel Manipulation (BCM), is proposed for automatic matching networks design with the introduced opera-tors. By integrating the learned matching networks into the baseline tracker, it achieves remarkable performance gains with neglectable overhead on tracking speed. 2.