Abstract
The widespread use of always-connected digital cameras in our everyday life has led to increasing concerns about the users’ privacy and security. How to develop privacy-preserving computer vision systems? In particular, we want to prevent the camera from obtaining detailed visual data that may contain private information. However, we also want the camera to capture useful information to perform computer vision tasks. Inspired by the trend of jointly de-signing optics and algorithms, we tackle the problem of privacy-preserving human pose estimation by optimizing an optical encoder (hardware-level protection) with a soft-ware decoder (convolutional neural network) in an end-to-end framework. We introduce a visual privacy protection layer in our optical encoder that, parametrized appropri-ately, enables the optimization of the camera lens’s point spread function (PSF). We validate our approach with ex-tensive simulations and a prototype camera. We show that our privacy-preserving deep optics approach successfully degrades or inhibits private attributes while maintaining important features to perform human pose estimation. 1.

Introduction
Cameras are ubiquitous and pervasive today: we have them in our smartphones, cars, homes, and cities. The tremendous amount of data collected from these devices en-ables a myriad of applications using computer vision-based technologies. We encounter such technologies in our daily life. At hospitals, visual sensors have given rise to ambient intelligence: physical spaces that are sensitive and respon-sive to the presence of humans. In this scenario, visual sys-tems enable more efficient clinical workflows and improved patient safety in intensive care units and operating rooms
[15]. In the context of gaming, camera devices use action and gesture recognition to create an interactive game expe-rience [44, 50]. However, with all these cameras collecting images in an always-connected digital world, a big chal-lenge has been raised: how to develop privacy-preserving computer vision systems? Specifically, we want to pre-vent the camera system from obtaining detailed visual data containing private information (such as faces), desirably at the hardware level. Simultaneously, we want the system to capture useful information that enables understanding sur-rounding objects and ongoing events.
For decades, cameras have been engineered to imitate the human vision system. Once the optical system is fixed, we use the cameras to acquire multiple high-fidelity im-ages. Then we tune computer vision algorithms to opti-mize their accuracy at specific tasks. Most computer vi-sion applications, even privacy-preserving approaches, rely on such a traditional digital imaging system. For example, one can detect privacy-sensitive everyday situations and en-able or disable an eye tracker’s first-person camera using a mechanical shutter [43]. However, such a method per-forms software-level processing on high-resolution videos acquired by traditional cameras, which may already contain privacy-sensitive data that could be exposed in an attack.
Instead of using traditional cameras to acquire the data and then using software-level processing to preserve pri-vacy, a better idea would be to design a camera that directly obviates sensitive data while still obtaining useful informa-tion for a given task. Recently, thanks to various software and hardware advances, the entire system (camera’s optical elements and image processing algorithms parameters) can be optimized in an end-to-end fashion, enabling the design
of domain-specific computational cameras [8, 24, 41, 18].
In the literature, the end-to-end optimization of domain-specific computational cameras is known as Deep Optics.
Prior work in this line aims to improve the optical elements to acquire high-resolution/high-fidelity images and simulta-neously improve the performance of computer vision algo-rithms. Here, we are interested in extending this philosophy to design privacy-preserving optical systems.
In this paper, we design a privacy-preserving computa-tional camera via end-to-end optimization to capture use-ful information to perceive humans in the scene while hid-ing privacy-sensitive information. Since many computer vi-sion applications need to analyze humans as the first step in their frameworks, we are interested in jointly optimiz-ing a freeform lens (the spatially varying surface height of a lens) together with a human pose estimation (HPE) network to develop a privacy-preserving HPE system. The contri-butions of our work are the following: (i) We introduce a privacy-preserving end-to-end optimization framework to extract useful information from the scene yet preventing the imaging system from obtaining detailed and privacy-sensitive visual data. (ii) Using our end-to-end optimiza-tion framework, we optimize an optical encoder (Hardware-level protection) with a software decoder (convolutional neural net) to add a visual privacy protection layer to HPE.
We jointly optimize the optical elements of the camera lens and fine-tune the backbone of a HPE network. We show that it is not necessary to retrain the HPE network layers to achieve privacy preservation. (iii) We perform extensive simulations on the COCO dataset to validate our proposed privacy-preserving deep optics approach for HPE. (iv) We built a proof-of-concept optical system. Our experimental results in hardware match the simulations.
In principle, our main objective is to show the benefits of a deep-optics-inspired approach to develop robust privacy-preserving vision algorithms. We design the optical system lens to degrade the image quality and obscure sensitive pri-vate information, which is opposite from the traditional ap-proach of improving the imaging quality. We do not aim to develop a new HPE network. Instead, we add a visual privacy protection layer to an already trained HPE network using the designed optics and fine-tune the backbone layers.
Our experiments show that there is a trade-off between the attained scene degradation and the HPE precision. 2.