Abstract
Recently, the performance of single image super-resolution (SR) has been signiﬁcantly improved with pow-erful networks. However, these networks are developed for image SR with speciﬁc integer scale factors (e.g., ×2/3/4), and cannot handle non-integer and asymmetric SR. In this paper, we propose to learn a scale-arbitrary image SR net-work from scale-speciﬁc networks. Speciﬁcally, we develop a plug-in module for existing SR networks to perform scale-arbitrary SR, which consists of multiple scale-aware feature adaption blocks and a scale-aware upsampling layer. More-over, conditional convolution is used in our plug-in module to generate dynamic scale-aware ﬁlters, which enables our network to adapt to arbitrary scale factors. Our plug-in module can be easily adapted to existing networks to real-ize scale-arbitrary SR with a single model. These networks plugged with our module can produce promising results for non-integer and asymmetric SR while maintaining state-of-the-art performance for SR with integer scale factors. Be-sides, the additional computational and memory cost of our module is very small. 1.

Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SR) aims at recovering a high-resolution (HR) image from its low-resolution (LR) counterpart. As a long-standing low-level computer vision problem, single image SR has been investigated for decades
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. Recently, the rise of deep learning provides a powerful tool to solve this problem, with numerous CNN-based methods [7, 8, 9, 10, 11] being developed to improve the SR performance.
Although recent CNN-based single image SR networks
[6, 10, 12, 13] have achieved promising performance, they are developed for image SR with speciﬁc integer scale fac-tors (e.g., ×2/3/4). In many real-world applications like image retargeting, image editing and artworks, non-integer
SR (e.g., from 100 × 100 to 220 × 220) and asymmetric SR (e.g., from 100 × 100 to 220 × 420) are highly demanded.
However, due to the ﬁxed ﬁlters in upscale modules, most
Figure 1. Visual comparison achieved by Bicubic, Meta-RCAN
[14] and our ArbRCAN. “(+Bicubic)” means that the network out-put is further resized to the expected resolution using bicubic in-terpolation for asymmetric scale factors. existing networks can only zoom in an image with speciﬁc integer scales and cannot handle scale-arbitrary SR in real-world scenarios.
To address this limitation, Hu et al.
[14] proposed a
Meta-SR network to dynamically predict ﬁlters in the up-scale module for different scale factors using meta-learning.
As a result, Meta-SR achieves promising performance on non-integer scale factors. However, scale information is only used for upsampling in Meta-SR. That is, features in the backbone are the same for all SR tasks with different scale factors, which hinders the further improvement of per-formance. Moreover, Meta-SR focuses on SR with non-integer scale factors but cannot handle SR with asymmetric scale factors.
In this paper, we propose to learn a scale-arbitrary single image SR network from scale-speciﬁc networks. Speciﬁ-cally, we develop a plug-in module for existing SR networks to enable scale-arbitrary SR, which consists of multiple scale-aware feature adaption blocks and a scale-aware up-sampling layer. The scale-aware feature adaption blocks are used to adapt features in the backbone to speciﬁc scale fac-tors and the scale-aware upsampling layer is used for scale-arbitrary upsampling. Within our plug-in module, con-ditional convolutions are used to generate dynamic scale-aware ﬁlters to handle different scale factors. Our plug-in module can be easily adapted to existing networks for scale-arbitrary SR with small additional computational and mem-ory cost. Baseline networks equipped with our module can produce promising results for non-integer and asymmetric
SR (Fig. 1), while maintaining state-of-the-art performance on integer scale factors with a single model. To the best of our knowledge, our plug-in module is the ﬁrst work to handle asymmetric SR.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows: 1) We develop a plug-in module for existing SR networks to achieve scale-arbitrary SR, including multiple scale-aware feature adaption blocks and a scale-aware upsampling layer. 2) Our plug-in module uses conditional convolution to dy-namically generate ﬁlters based on the input scale infor-mation, which facilitates our network to adapt to speciﬁc scale factors. 3) Experimental results show that baseline networks equipped with our module produce promising re-sults for scale-arbitrary SR with only a single model. A video demo is provided in the supplemental material. 2.