Abstract
Recent advances in trajectory prediction have shown that explicit reasoning about agents’ intent is important to accurately forecast their motion. However, the current research activities are not directly applicable to intelli-gent and safety critical systems. This is mainly because very few public datasets are available, and they only con-sider pedestrian-speciﬁc intents for a short temporal hori-zon from a restricted egocentric view. To this end, we pro-pose LOKI (LOng term and Key Intentions), a novel large-scale dataset that is designed to tackle joint trajectory and intention prediction for heterogeneous trafﬁc agents (pedes-trians and vehicles) in an autonomous driving setting. The
LOKI dataset is created to discover several factors that may affect intention, including i) agent’s own will, ii) social in-teractions, iii) environmental constraints, and iv) contex-tual information. We also propose a model that jointly per-forms trajectory and intention prediction, showing that re-currently reasoning about intention can assist with trajec-tory prediction. We show our method outperforms state-of-the-art trajectory prediction methods by upto 27% and also provide a baseline for frame-wise intention estimation.
The dataset is available at https://usa.honda-ri. com/loki 1.

Introduction
Over the past few years, there has been extensive re-search into predicting future trajectories of dynamic agents in scenes, such as pedestrians and vehicles. This is an in-credibly important and challenging task for safety critical applications such as autonomous vehicles or social robot navigation. While these methods have been signiﬁcantly advanced over recent years, very few benchmarks speciﬁ-cally test if these models can accurately reason about key
*Co-ﬁrst author. The authorship order is randomly determined
†Work done during the internship at Honda Research Institute
Figure 1: We show that reasoning about long-term goals and short-term intents plays a signiﬁcant role in trajectory prediction. With a lack of comprehensive benchmarks for this purpose, we introduce a new dataset for intention and trajectory prediction. An example use case is illustrated in (a) where we predict the trajectory of the target vehicle. In (b), long-term goals are estimated from agent’s own mo-tion. Interactions in (c) and environmental constraints such as road topology and lane restrictions in (d) inﬂuence the agent’s short-term intent and thus future trajectories. maneuvers such as sudden turns and lane changes of vehi-cles or pedestrians crossing the road. Traditional trajectory error metrics may not capture performance on frame-level maneuvers, which is critical for safe planning.
An intelligent trajectory prediction system should be able to understand and model dynamic human behaviors.
The study of human behavior as goal-directed entities has a long and rich interdisciplinary history across the sub-ﬁelds of psychology [1], neuroscience [2] and computer vision [3]. The human decision making process is inher-ently hierarchical, consisting of several levels of reasoning and planning mechanisms that operate in tandem to achiev-ing respective short and long term desires. Recent works have showed that explicitly reasoning about long-term goals
[3, 4, 5] and short-term intents [6, 7, 8] can assist with tra-jectory prediction.
In this work, we propose to couple the tasks of hetero-geneous (vehicles, pedestrians, etc.) multi-agent trajectory forecasting and intention prediction. We believe it is critical to explicitly reason about agents’ long-term goals as well as their short-term intents.
In our work, we deﬁne goals to be a ﬁnal position an agent wants to reach for a given pre-diction horizon [9, 5], while intent refers to how an agent accomplishes their goal [10]. For example, consider a ve-hicle at an intersection. At the highest level, say they want to reach their ultimate goal of turning left to their ﬁnal goal point, which in turn might be necessary for some higher-level end (such as going home). However, the exact mo-tion of their trajectory is subject to many factors including i) agent’s own will, ii) social interactions, iii) environmen-tal constraints, iv) contextual cues. Thus, when reasoning about the agent’s intent to turn left it is important to con-sider not only agent dynamics but also how intent is subject to change based on map topology or neighboring agents (see
Figure 1). We believe this complex hierarchy of short-term intents and long-term goals is ubiquitous and in fact, crucial, for agent motion planning and hence by extension, for mo-tion prediction. We propose an architecture that considers long-term goals similar to [9, 5, 3, 4] but adds a key com-ponent of frame-wise intention estimation which is used to condition the trajectory prediction module. By forcing the model to learn discrete short-term intents of agents, we ob-serve improved performance by the prediction module.
Equally rich & successful is the contemporary history of the use of datasets for benchmarking progress in computer vision. Ushered by seminal works such as MNIST [11] and benchmarks such as ImageNet [12], benchmarking progress and learning from data has played a key role in the success of modern deep learning. Currently, there exists no public datasets that allow for explicit frame-wise intention predic-tion for heterogeneous agents in highly complex environ-ments. Although few datasets are designed to study pedes-trian intents or actions [13, 7, 6, 14] from egocentric view, it is an inherent limitation to extensive study of tasks for au-tonomous driving. Thus, we propose a joint trajectory and intention prediction dataset that contains RGB images with corresponding LiDAR point clouds with detailed, frame-wise labels for pedestrians and vehicles. The LOKI dataset allows explicit modeling of agents’ future intent and exten-sive benchmarking for both tasks. It also shows promising directions to jointly reason about intentions and trajectories while considering different external factors such as agents’ predilection, social interactions and environmental factors.
We show that by modeling short-term intent and long-term goals with explicit supervision via intention labels, better trajectory prediction accuracy can be achieved. In addition, predicting a speciﬁc intention at each frame adds a layer of abstraction to our model that improves understanding prediction decisions, an important step towards maintaining safety critical applications.
In conclusion, the contribution of our work is twofold.
First, we propose the ﬁrst publicly available heterogeneous dataset which contains frame-wise intention annotations and captures trajectories of up to 20 seconds containing both 2D and 3D labels with RGB and LiDAR inputs. Sec-ond, we illustrate the efﬁcacy of separately reasoning about both long-term goals and short-term intents through abla-tion studies. Speciﬁcally, we highlight how the subtask of intention prediction improves prediction performance, and propose a model that outperforms state-of-the-art mul-timodal benchmarks by upto 27%. We believe our highly
ﬂexible dataset will allow the trajectory prediction commu-nity to further explore topics within the intention-based pre-diction space. In addition, the problem of intention estima-tion is an involved task in and of itself for which our work provides a strong baseline. 2.