Abstract
Generative models for 3D shapes represented by hierar-chies of parts can generate realistic and diverse sets of out-puts. However, existing models suffer from the key practi-cal limitation of modelling shapes holistically and thus can-not perform conditional sampling, i.e. they are not able to generate variants on individual parts of generated shapes without modifying the rest of the shape. This is limiting for applications such as 3D CAD design that involve adjust-ing created shapes at multiple levels of detail. To address this, we introduce LSD-StructureNet, an augmentation to the StructureNet architecture that enables re-generation of parts situated at arbitrary positions in the hierarchies of its outputs. We achieve this by learning individual, probabilis-tic conditional decoders for each hierarchy depth. We eval-uate LSD-StructureNet on the PartNet dataset, the largest dataset of 3D shapes represented by hierarchies of parts.
Our results show that contrarily to existing methods, LSD-StructureNet can perform conditional sampling without im-pacting inference speed or the realism and diversity of its outputs. 1.

Introduction
Computer-Aided Design (CAD) involves creating the structure and geometry of 3D objects organized according to hierarchies of parts. This process can be emulated by sampling from generative models trained on datasets of hi-erarchically structured objects. While existing models are able to produce novel, diverse and realistic outputs, they only model hierarchies holistically, via single latent spaces that govern the geometry and/or structure of the entirety of their outputs. This makes them ill-suited for use in CAD, as creating objects involves making decisions at multiple lev-els of detail. For instance, designing a chair consists of both high-level design choices such as deciding whether a chair should have arm-rests or not and low-level design choices such as deciding on the geometry and positioning of the arm-rests.
In this paper, we address this issue by introducing LSD-Figure 1. We augment existing methods for generative modelling of 3D shapes structured according to hierarchies so each structural level of detail is modelled with its own generative process. This enables us to generate variants on any sub-tree of the output hier-archy by simply re-sampling and decoding from a sub-sequence of the learnt latent spaces and conditionally on the root node of the sub-tree (e.g. corresponding to the base, seat or back of the chair), without modifying the remainder of the output hierarchy.
StructureNet, an augmented version of the StructureNet
[13] architecture that can efﬁciently re-generate arbitrary sub-hierarchies of hierarchically structured 3D objects. Our solution consists of learning one latent space for each depth of an output hierarchy. We term the structure and geome-try of elements at the same depth LSD (Level of Structural
Detail), and generate these elements by sampling from the corresponding latent space and decoding the sample con-ditionally on the element’s parent. We can thus regenerate multiple varying sub-hierarchies of an object without modi-fying the remainder of the hierarchy by simply re-sampling from the latent spaces at and beyond the appropriate hi-erarchy depths. In contrast, re-generating a sub-hierarchy with existing generative models cannot be achieved without re-generating the entire hierarchy from scratch and without any guarantee the remainder of the re-generated structure
will be at all faithful to the remainder of the original struc-ture.
Sets of sub-hierarchies generated using our strategy should be both realistic and diverse in terms of seman-tics, structure and geometry. This presents a challenge, as data samples in publicly available datasets of hierarchi-cally structured 3D objects are very different from one an-other and thus do not contain the wide conditional distribu-tions of child parts we seek to learn. We show that LSD-StructureNet overcomes this challenge, producing outputs that are more realistic and diverse than existing methods.
Furthermore, LSD-StructureNet is capable of producing variations on its outputs that differ only beyond a certain
LSD. We also show that such outputs are similarly superior to the closest obtainable approximations from StructureNet, and can be obtained far more speedily. 2.