Abstract
We present an efficient approximate message passing solver for the lifted disjoint paths problem (LDP), a natural but NP-hard model for multiple object tracking (MOT). Our tracker scales to very large instances that come from long and crowded MOT sequences. Our approximate solver en-ables us to process the MOT15/16/17 benchmarks without sacrificing solution quality and allows for solving MOT20, which has been out of reach up to now for LDP solvers due to its size and complexity. On all these four standard MOT benchmarks we achieve performance comparable or bet-ter than current state-of-the-art methods including a tracker based on an optimal LDP solver. 1.

Introduction
Deriving high-level understanding from a video is a de-sired task that has been studied in computer vision for a long time. Nevertheless, solving the problem is a long way off. A computer vision system able to extract the motions of objects appearing in a video in terms of trajectories is considered as a prerequisite for the goal. This task called multiple object tracking (MOT) has numerous applications, e.g. in the area of video surveillance [18], sports analysis
[2, 42], urban planning [3], or autonomous driving [39, 19].
Yet, solving MOT is challenging, especially for long and crowded sequences. The predominant approach for MOT is the tracking-by-detection paradigm, which splits the prob-lem into two subtasks. First, objects are detected in all video frames by an object detector. Then, the detections are linked across frames to form trajectories. While the performance of object detectors has improved considerably by latest ad-vances of CNNs [47, 63, 46, 17], the latter task called the data association remains challenging. The data association reasons from pairwise costs, which indicate for each pair of detections the likelihood of belonging to the same object.
Appearance and spatio-temporal information are often ambiguous, especially in crowded scenes, so that pairwise costs can be misleading. Moreover, object detectors pro-duce more errors in crowded scenes due to partial occlu-sions. To resolve these issues, it is crucial that the data as-sociation incorporates global context.
The disjoint paths problem (DP) [65, 35] is a natural model for MOT. Results are computed efficiently using a min-cost flow algorithm that delivers the global optimal so-lution. Unfortunately, the integration of long range tem-poral interactions is limited, as DP obeys the first-order
Markov-chain assumption: for each trajectory, consistency is ensured only between directly linked detections, which is a strong simplification that ignores higher order consisten-cies among multiple linked detections.
To fix this deficiency, [28] generalizes DP to lifted dis-joint paths (LDP) by using additional connectivity priors in terms of lifted edges. This makes the formulation much more expressive while it maintains the feasibility set of the
DP (Sec. 3). The optimization problem enables to take into account pairwise costs between arbitrary detections belong-ing to one trajectory.
It thus enables to incorporate long range temporal interactions effectively and leads to consid-erable improvement of recall and precision [28]. Similar ex-tensions have been made for the multicut problem [56, 57].
While the integration of the global context by LDP is crucial to obtain high-quality tracking results, it makes the data association problem NP-hard. Still, [28] presented a global optimal LDP solver usable for semi-crowded se-quences with reasonable computational effort. However, when applied to longer and crowded sequences, such ap-proaches are not tractable anymore, due to too high de-mands on runtime and memory.
In order to close this gap, we present the first approx-imate solver for LDP. The resulting tracker scales to big problem instances and incorporates global context with sim-ilar accuracy as the global optimal LDP solver. Moreover, our solver outputs certificates in terms of primal/dual gaps.
In particular, our solver is based on a Lagrangean (dual) decomposition of the problem. This dual is iteratively opti-mized by dual block coordinate ascent (a.k.a. message pass-ing) using techniques from [54], see Sec. 4.1. The decom-position relies on subproblems that are added in a cutting plane fashion. We obtain high-quality primal solutions by solving minimum cost flow problems with edge costs syn-thesizing information from both base and lifted edges from the dual task and improve them via a local search procedure.
We validate the quality of the solver on four standard
MOT benchmarks (Sec. 5). We achieve comparable or bet-ter performance w.r.t. the current state-of-the-art trackers in-cluding the tracker based on the optimal LDP solver [28] on
MOT15/16/17 [37, 45]. Furthermore, our proposed tracker performs on par with state-of-the-art on the more challeng-ing MOT20 dataset [16] which is composed of long and crowded sequences. Therefore, lightweight features and a fast solver are crucial to perform tracking on such massive sequences. Our work thus extends the applicability of the successful LDP formulation to a wider range of instances.
Contribution of this work is in summary as follows:
• We make the LDP problem more accessible and appli-cable by introducing an approximate solver with better scalability properties than the global optimal LDP solver, while resulting in similar tracking performance, and be-ing independent of Gurobi [22].
• We present an MOT system that is scalable to challenging sequences by using considerably less computationally de-manding features than what is used in the state-of-the-art tracker [28]. Our system incorporates higher order con-sistencies in a scalable way, i.e. it uses an approximate solver and provides a gap to the optimum.
We make our LDP solver1 and our MOT pipeline2 available. 2.