Abstract
Point completion refers to completing the missing ge-ometries of an object from incomplete observations. Main-stream methods predict the missing shapes by decoding a global feature learned from the input point cloud, which of-ten leads to deficient results in preserving topology consis-tency and surface details.
In this work, we present ME-PCN, a point completion network that leverages emptiness in 3D shape space. Given a single depth scan, previous methods often encode the occupied partial shapes while ig-noring the empty regions (e.g. holes) in depth maps. In con-trast, we argue that these ‘emptiness’ clues indicate shape boundaries that can be used to improve topology represen-tation and detail granularity on surfaces. Specifically, our
ME-PCN encodes both the occupied point cloud and the neighboring ‘empty points’. It estimates coarse-grained but complete and reasonable surface points in the first stage, followed by a refinement stage to produce fine-grained sur-face details. Comprehensive experiments verify that our
ME-PCN presents better qualitative and quantitative per-formance against the state-of-the-art. Besides, we further prove that our ‘emptiness’ design is lightweight and easy to embed in existing methods, which shows consistent effec-tiveness in improving the CD and EMD scores. 1.

Introduction
Capturing 3D data for objects around us is as easy as taking a picture with cell phones thanks to the popularity of common 3D scanning sensors like LIDAR and depth cam-eras. Such availability has greatly enriched the practical ap-plications in vision and robotics communities.
Different from image sensors, data from 3D scanners usually come incompletely with a much lower resolution, e.g., depth maps with missing values. To recover com-plete shapes from the partial inputs, volumetric and view-based projection methods leverage 3D convolutions to rep-*Corresponding author (a) Input (b) Ours (c) MSN (d) GT
Figure 1: Given a partial scan (a), our method encodes the spatial emptiness (blue points in (a)) neighboring to obser-vations and predicts complete and topology consistent sur-faces (b) compared with MSN [10] on the ground-truth (d). resent shapes into voxel grids. However, those 3D convolu-tions, suffering from expensive memory and computational cost, are bottlenecked by the resolution-computation bal-ance. It becomes even disadvantaged when the inputs are unordered and sparse. Implicit methods learn a signed dis-tance function (SDF) to represent shape surfaces and are capable of reaching any high resolution. However, they still rely on voxel grids, and an extra computation-intensive post-processing step is required to extract the final shape surface. In contrast, the point cloud is a more compact rep-resentation of 3D shapes. Compared with voxels, it is more scalable and computation-efficient to express shapes with different granularity. Several deep neural networks have been proposed to directly take advantage of point cloud rep-resentation, such as PCN [31], TopNet [21], MSN [10].
A key concept in existing point completion methods is an encoder-decoder architecture followed by an optional refining process, where the completed point cloud is gen-erated from an encoded global feature. The widely used encoders for point cloud are PointNet [15] and its variant
PointNet++ [16]. With the encoder-decoder design, current methods directly predict the complete points from the visi-ble, occupied input points, while ignoring the unoccupied,
empty regions in the inputs. In our view, the unoccupied re-gions are the complement of shape occupancy, thus also in-dicating the topology of 3D objects. Compared with learn-ing from observable shapes, learning the emptiness presents extra significance, especially for complex shapes, such as non-convex surfaces with holes.
In other words, the in-put scan tells not only the shape occupancy but also ‘where should not be occupied’. However, current methods predict shapes in the whole 3D space, which could be insensitive to subtle topologies. In our method, the emptiness in the input can inform our network ‘which regions should not be oc-cupied’, and helps to keep consistent shape topology. Such emptiness information can be encoded by a mask given a viewpoint and can be easily obtained by thresholding the input depth scan or extracted from RGB images.
Inspired by the above, we introduce ME-PCN, a novel point completion network informed with mask emptiness.
To encode the emptiness clues on a mask, 3D rays are ra-diated from the viewpoint towards the empty regions of the mask. All points along the rays will be encoded as empty points. In ME-PCN, only empty points that are in the neigh-borhood of visible points are processed by neural networks in addition to the input point cloud. Since visible points and empty points have totally different semantics, two separate networks are used to encode them into two global features.
For surface completion, directly decoding shapes from global features can predict plausible structures but usually results in coarse and over-smoothed surfaces [10, 31].
It also neglects subtle structures on the boundary between real and empty points. To this end, a final refining stage is per-formed after the coarse decoder. Local features are learned from neighboring empty and visible points for each coarse point, which augments the coarse input with on-surface de-tails. The effectiveness of the emptiness inputs is verified both qualitatively and quantitatively. In summary, the main contributions of our work are:
• We provide a novel encoding modality for point com-pletion. Prior arts learn complete shapes only from visible points, while our method involves emptiness learning to represent consistent shape topology and improves surface details.
• We propose ME-PCN to learn the shape emptiness from depth masks. Given a depth scan, 3D rays radi-ated from the viewpoint to empty regions on the mask are encoded to represent the emptiness in 3D shape
It informs ME-PCN of the shape boundaries space. and improves the completion performance.
• Extensive experiments verify that our emptiness learn-ing strategy can be easily embedded into modern point-based shape completion pipelines to improve the
CD and EMD scores, which further makes our method outperform the state-of-the-art. 2.