Abstract
Ranking list
Pairwise Similarity (q,i1) (q,i2) (q,i3) q i1 i2 i3
Unsupervised person re-identiﬁcation (Re-ID) remains challenging due to the lack of ground-truth labels. Existing methods often rely on estimated pseudo labels via itera-tive clustering and classiﬁcation, and they are unfortunately highly susceptible to performance penalties incurred by the inaccurate estimated number of clusters. Alternatively, we propose the Meta Pairwise Relationship Distillation (MPRD) method to estimate the pseudo labels of sample pairs for unsupervised person Re-ID. Speciﬁcally, it consists of a Con-volutional Neural Network (CNN) and Graph Convolutional
Network (GCN), in which the GCN estimates the pseudo la-bels of sample pairs based on the current features extracted by CNN, and the CNN learns better features by involving high-ﬁdelity positive and negative sample pairs imposed by GCN. To achieve this goal, a small amount of labeled samples are used to guide GCN training, which can distill meta knowledge to judge the difference in the neighborhood structure between positive and negative sample pairs. Ex-tensive experiments on Market-1501, DukeMTMC-reID and
MSMT17 datasets show that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches. 1.

Introduction
Given a query pedestrian image, person re-identiﬁcation (Re-ID) aims to match it with target pedestrian images of the same identity. It remains challenging due to the large appearance variations caused by different viewing angles, light conditions and background clutters in disjoint scenes.
Existing methods usually learn discriminative features in a supervised manner [39, 35, 2, 1, 25], which requires exten-sive manual labeling efforts. Due to the prohibitively high cost of such annotation, training person Re-ID systems in the unsupervised manner has become a popular and practical research topic.
*Corresponding author. q i1 q i2
Baseline
Network
Pairwise Label
Estimation q i3
Pairwise Neighborhoods 
Structure
Pairs (q,i1) (q,i2) (q,i3)
Pairs
Pairwise Pseudo 
Labels (1,0,0) (1,1,0) (1,1,1) if K<2 if K=2 if K>2
KNN (a) Only Similarity
Pairwise 
Pseudo 
Labels (1,0,1)
GCN  (b) Our method  i1 i2 i3
Ranking list
Ranking list
Ranking list
Figure 1.
Illustrations of two pseudo label estimation methods, in which (a) the traditional method directly take the pairwise sim-ilarity to estimate pseudo labels, while (b) our method takes the pairwise neighborhood structures to estimate pseudo labels. Each circle denotes an individual image. The green circles represent the same identity as the query image, dark color indicates high visual similarity, while red circles represent other identities.
Recent unsupervised person Re-ID methods [13, 14, 6] attempted to learn discriminative feature embeddings from unlabeled training data based on iterative clustering and classiﬁcation. However, it is often nontrivial to determine the number of clusters, and mishaps that wrongly estimate the cluster numbers often incurs excessive noise in the pseudo labels.
To address these issues, we reformulate the unsupervised discriminative feature learning as a pairwise relationship estimation problem. In this paper, we use the term positive pair to denote a pair of the pedestrian images of the same perceived identity; and conversely, negative pair to denote images with different perceived identities. In the embed-ding speciﬁed by a GCN, positive pairs are pulled closer; while negative pairs are pushed away from one another. With this soft semantic preserving rule replacing the clustering
algorithm, the dilemma of determining cluster numbers are circumvented. In the unsupervised learning paradigm, we will need to differentiate such positive pairs and negative pairs without relying on human annotations. One intuitive solution is thresholding visual similarity scores as the crite-rion, i.e., considering two images with high visual similarity as a positive pair, and vice versa. However, as with many other thresholding based techniques, this criterion is unreli-able in practice. For example, as shown in Figure 1 (a), pair (q, i2) is higher in visual similarity score than pair (q, i3), contradicting the ground-truth. Alternatively, we argue that a graph structure is more suitable to estimate pairwise la-bels, as shown in Figure 1 (b), which exploits contextual information to deduce the correct pairwise pseudo label for (q, i2).
In this paper, we propose the Meta Pairwise Relationship
Distillation (MPRD) method for unsupervised person Re-ID. It comprises a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and Graph Convolutional Network (GCN), where the GCN estimates the pseudo labels of sample pairs via the meta knowledge learned from small amount of labeled samples, and the CNN learns the discriminative features from input images according to the estimated pseudo labels.
Speciﬁcally, the CNN and GCN are trained in an alter-nating manner, which iteratively and respectively reﬁnes its per-image feature and pairwise pseudo labels. At each iter-ation, the CNN extracts the current per-image feature, and updates the feature memory by a linear combination of it and the previous features. Afterwards, the pairwise neighbor-hood structure is estimated by connecting every image with its neighbors, according to the visual similarity metric. The resulting graph structure is then fed into the GCN to infer the pseudo label for sample pairs. Empirically, we found that it is very hard to train the GCN without any supervision, therefore, we exploit a small amount of labeled metadata to explicitly supervise GCN, which greatly helps its robustness.
The GCN is only leveraged to provide pseudo supervision to the CNN training, and it is excluded in the testing stage.
We evaluate our proposed method on Market-1501 [34],
DukeMTMC-reID [20], and MSMT17 [26] datasets.
In summary, the contributions of this paper are summa-rized as follows. 1. We reformulate the unsupervised discriminative feature learning task as a pairwise relationship estimation prob-lem, which avoids the error-prone step of estimating the number of clusters in most existing methods. 2. We propose the MPRD method for unsupervised person
Re-ID, which incorporates a dedicated GCN as the pair-wise pseudo label generator in the training stage and it iteratively reﬁnes its estimated labels with better CNN features. 3. We design an effective GCN that generates high-ﬁdelity pseudo labels based on the pairwise neighborhood struc-tures. 2.