Abstract
In this paper, we study a novel meta aggregation scheme towards binarizing graph neural networks (GNNs). We be-gin by developing a vanilla 1-bit GNN framework that bi-narizes both the GNN parameters and the graph features.
Despite the lightweight architecture, we observed that this vanilla framework suffered from insufficient discriminative power in distinguishing graph topologies, leading to a dra-matic drop in performance. This discovery motivates us to devise meta aggregators to improve the expressive power of vanilla binarized GNNs, of which the aggregation schemes can be adaptively changed in a learnable manner based on the binarized features. Towards this end, we propose two dedicated forms of meta neighborhood aggregators, an ex-clusive meta aggregator termed as Greedy Gumbel Neigh-borhood Aggregator (GNA), and a diffused meta aggrega-tor termed as Adaptable Hybrid Neighborhood Aggregator (ANA). GNA learns to exclusively pick one single optimal aggregator from a pool of candidates, while ANA learns a hybrid aggregation behavior to simultaneously retain the benefits of several individual aggregators. Furthermore, the proposed meta aggregators may readily serve as a generic plugin module into existing full-precision GNNs. Exper-iments across various domains demonstrate that the pro-posed method yields results superior to the state of the art. 1.

Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have recently emerged as the dominant paradigm for learning and analyzing non-Euclidean data, which contain rich node content informa-tion as well as topological relational information [7, 12, 53].
As such, a massive number of GNN architectures have been developed [21, 46, 55, 60, 63]. The success of GNNs also triggers a great surge of interest in applying elabo-rated graph networks to various tasks across many domains, such as object detection [11, 8], pose estimation [59], point cloud processing [22, 51, 36], and visual SLAM [40]. These
Figure 1. Illustrations of the computational workflow in (a) con-ventional full-precision GNNs and (b) the proposed 1-bit GNNs.
In particular, we devise two meta aggregators for the proposed model, termed as Greedy Gumbel Aggregator (GNA) and Adapt-able Hybrid Aggregator (ANA), that learn to perform adaptive ag-gregation in a graph-aware and layer-aware manner.
GNN-based applications, in general, rely on cumbersome graph architectures to deliver gratifying results. For exam-ple, SuperGlue, a GNN-based feature matching approach, requires 12M network parameters to achieve the state-of-the-art performance [40].
In practice, however, such applications typically require a compact and lightweight architecture for real-time inter-action, especially in resource-constrained environments. In the case of autonomous driving [30], for example, it is critical to maintain fast and timely responses for GNN-based SLAM algorithms to handle complex traffic condi-tions, thereby leading to the urgent need of compressing cumbersome GNN models. The work of [58], as the first attempt, leverages knowledge distillation to learn a com-pact student GNN with fewer parameters. In spite of the improved efficiency, this approach still relies on the expen-sive floating-point operations, let alone a well-performed teacher model pre-trained in the first place.
In this paper, we strive to make one step further towards ultra lightweight GNNs. Our goal is to train a customized 1-bit GNN, as shown in Fig. 1, that allows for favorable mem-ory efficiency and meanwhile enjoys competitive perfor-mance. We start with developing a na¨ıve GNN binarization framework, achieved through converting 32-bit features and parameters into 1-bit ones, followed by leveraging straight-aggregators, leading to favorable competence to handle the challenging 1-bit graph features. Moreover, the proposed
GNA and ANA can be readily extended as portable mod-ules into the general full-precision GNN models to enhance the expressive capability.
In sum, our contribution is a novel GNN-customized binarization framework that generates a 1-bit lightweight
GNN model with competitive performance, making it com-petent for resource-constrained applications such as edge computing. This is specifically achieved through an adap-tive meta aggregation scheme to accommodate the chal-lenging quantized graph features. We evaluate the pro-posed customized framework on several large-scale bench-marks across different domains and graph tasks. Experi-mental results demonstrate that the proposed meta aggrega-tors achieve results superior to the state-of-the-art, not only on the devised 1-bit binarized GNN models, but also on the general full-precision models. 2.