Abstract
Weakly supervised salient object detection (WSOD) tar-gets to train a CNNs-based saliency network using only low-cost annotations. Existing WSOD methods take vari-ous techniques to pursue single ”high-quality” pseudo label from low-cost annotations and then develop their saliency networks. Though these methods have achieved good per-formance, the generated single label is inevitably affected by adopted refinement algorithms and shows prejudiced characteristics which further influence the saliency net-works. In this work, we introduce a new multiple-pseudo-label framework to integrate more comprehensive and accu-rate saliency cues from multiple labels, avoiding the afore-mentioned problem. Specifically, we propose a multi-filter directive network (MFNet) including a saliency network as well as multiple directive filters. The directive filter (DF) is designed to extract and filter more accurate saliency cues from the noisy pseudo labels. The multiple accurate cues from multiple DFs are then simultaneously propagated to the saliency network with a multi-guidance loss. Exten-sive experiments on five datasets over four metrics demon-strate that our method outperforms all the existing con-generic methods. Moreover, it is also worth noting that our framework is flexible enough to apply to existing meth-ods and improve their performance. The code and results of our method are available at https://github.com/
OIPLab-DUT/MFNet. 1.

Introduction
With the emergence of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [16], a lot of salient object detection (SOD) meth-ods [31, 22, 32, 41] based on CNNs have been proposed
*Equal Contributions
†Corresponding Author
Figure 1. Different pseudo labels synthesized by different re-finement algorithms on class activation map (CAM), in which Y1 and Y2 represent pseudo labels from pixel-wise [4] and superpixel-wise [29] refinement algorithms, respectively. and broken the records. However, these CNNs-based SOD methods heavily rely on large amounts of hand-labeling data with pixel-level annotations, which are labor-intensive and time-consuming [39].
Due to the high cost of labeling pixel-level annotations, some promising works have been proposed to explore other low-cost alternatives, including scribble [38, 35] and image-level category labels [36, 29, 17]. Among them, the cate-gory label based methods only require category labels for training, and an overwhelming amount of labels for the existence of object categories are already given (e.g. Ima-geNet [5]). Thus, in this paper, we focus on the image-level category label based salient object detection (WSOD1).
Previous works on WSOD proposed various techniques such as global smooth pooling [29], multi-source supervi-sions [36] and alternate optimization [17] to pursue sin-1For convenience, we denote WSOD as methods based on image-level category label in this paper.
gle ”high-quality” pseudo label for training their saliency networks. Though these works have achieved good perfor-mance, the generated single ”high-quality” pseudo label is usually trapped by its prejudiced characteristics due to the different adopted refinement algorithms. For example, the incomplete deficiency (3rd column in Figure 1) and redun-dant noise (4th column in Figure 1).
Instead of pursuing single ”high-quality” pseudo labels, we propose to utilize multiple pseudo labels to establish a more robust framework and avoid the negative impacts from the single prejudiced label. To begin with, we adopt two different refinement algorithms, including a pixel-wise one [4] and a superpixel-wise one [29], to synthesize two different pseudo labels. Both of these two algorithms uti-lize abundant appearance information in RGB images to perform refinement for class activation maps (CAMs) [43].
The pixel-wise one treats each individual pixel as units, takes its class activation score as clues and then infers its neighbor pixels’ scores, while the superpixel-wise one takes superpixels as its operation units. As a result, the synthe-sized pseudo labels Y1 (from pixel-wise algorithm) and Y2 (from superpixel-wise algorithm) describe different charac-teristics. As is shown in Figure 1, Y1 provides better de-tailed information, but is usually trapped in incompleteness, while Y2 can cover more complete objects but introduces more extra noisy information. These observations drive us to explore how to extract and integrate more comprehensive and robust saliency cues from multiple pseudo labels.
The core insight of this work is to adequately excavate the comprehensive saliency cues in multiple pseudo labels and avoid the prejudice of the single label. To be specific, for multiple pseudo labels, we 1) extract abundant accurate multiple saliency cues from multiple noisy labels, and 2) perform integration and propagate the integrated multiple cues to the saliency network. Concretely, our contributions are as follows:
• We introduce a new framework to utilize multiple pseudo labels for WSOD, which employs more com-prehensive and robust saliency cues in multiple labels to avoid the negative impacts of a single label.
• We design a multi-filter directive network (denoted as MFNet), in which multiple directive filters and a multi-guidance loss are proposed to extract and in-tegrate multiple saliency cues from multiple pseudo labels respectively.
• Extensive experiments on five benchmark datasets over four metrics demonstrate the superiority of our method as well as the multiple pseudo labels.
• We also extend the proposed framework to existing method MSW [36] and the prove its effectiveness by achieving 9.1% improvements over F ω
β metric on
ECSSD dataset. 2.