Abstract
Many objects do not appear frequently enough in com-plex scenes (e.g., certain handbags in living rooms) for training an accurate object detector, but are often found frequently by themselves (e.g., in product images). Yet, these object-centric images are not effectively leveraged for improving object detection in scene-centric images.
In this paper, we propose Mosaic of Object-centric im-ages as Scene-centric images (MOSAICOS), a simple and novel framework that is surprisingly effective at tackling the challenges of long-tailed object detection. Keys to our approach are three-fold: (i) pseudo scene-centric im-age construction from object-centric images for mitigating domain differences, (ii) high-quality bounding box impu-tation using the object-centric images’ class labels, and (iii) a multi-stage training procedure. On LVIS object de-tection (and instance segmentation), MOSAICOS leads to a massive 60% (and 23%) relative improvement in aver-age precision for rare object categories. We also show that our framework can be compatibly used with other existing approaches to achieve even further gains. Our pre-trained models are publicly available at https:// github.com/czhang0528/MosaicOS/. 1.

Introduction
Detecting objects in complex daily scenes is a long-standing task in computer vision [15, 19, 52, 70]. With rapid advances in deep neural networks [28, 33, 39, 60, 62] and the emergence of large-scale datasets [41, 48, 59, 67, 77], there has been remarkable progress in detecting common objects (e.g., cars, humans, etc.) [4, 27, 46, 47, 49, 54, 57, 83]. However, detecting rare objects (e.g., unicycles, bird feeders, etc.) proves much more challenging due to the in-In particular, complex herent limitation of training data. scenes in which an object appears pose another variation
∗Equal contributions
Figure 1. Object frequencies in scene-centric and object-centric images. Orange bars show the number of instances per class in the scene-centric LVIS v0.5 dataset [22]. Class indices are sorted by the instance numbers. Black dots show the number of images in the object-centric ImageNet datasets [11] for each corresponding class. The two types of images have very different trends of object frequencies. We also show three examples of both datasets, corre-sponding to frequent, common, and rare classes in LVIS. Red and green boxes indicate the objects. These two types of images have different focuses and object sizes. factor that is too diverse to capture from a small amount of data [22, 69, 82]. Developing algorithms to overcome such a “long-tailed” distribution of object instances in scene-centric images (SCI) [22, 41, 48, 59] has thus attracted a
ﬂurry of research interests [45, 63, 72].
Fortunately, the uncommon objects in scene-centric im-ages often appear more frequently in object-centric images (OCI) in which the objects of interest occupy the main and most salient regions (e.g., product images). For example, given “bird feeder” as query, a popular image search en-gine (e.g., Google Images) mostly retrieves object-centric
“bird feeder” results. Similarly, curated object recognition datasets such as ImageNet [11] contain more than a thou-sand object-centric “bird feeder” images, nearly a hundred times more than scene-centric images from LVIS v0.5 [22].
We further illustrate this point in Figure 1, in which a dis-crepancy in frequencies of the same objects in ImageNet
and LVIS can generally be observed (see § 3 for details).
Can we leverage such abundant object-centric images to improve long-tailed object detection? The most common approach to this is to leverage these images for pre-training the object detector’s backbone [26, 27, 83]. While this gen-eral approach may beneﬁt various tasks beyond object de-tection, it is highly data-intensive and does not take care of the domain gap between the pre-training and downstream tasks (see § 6.3 for analysis). As a result, they do not al-ways improve the object detection accuracy [26, 83].
In this paper, we propose MOSAICOS (Mosaic of
Object-centric images as Scene-centric images), a simple and effective framework to leverage object-centric images for object detection. MOSAICOS directly uses object-centric images during the training of object detectors. There are three key ingredients. The ﬁrst one is the construction of pseudo scene-centric images from object-centric images using mosaic1. The second one is the imputation of bound-ing box annotations using image class labels. The third ingredient is a multi-stage training procedure for learning from both gold scene-centric and synthesized pseudo scene-centric annotations. Figure 2 illustrates our framework.
Our use of mosaic and bounding box imputation to con-struct pseudo scene-centric images from object-centric im-ages tackles two key challenges in leveraging object-centric images for object detection. The ﬁrst challenge is a “do-main" gap between object-centric and scene-centric images: an object-centric image usually contains fewer (but bigger) object instances and a less complex background and this discrepancy is believed to unfavorably hinder knowledge transfer [73, 78]. The second challenge is missing detection annotations: object-centric images, either from the Inter-net or object recognition datasets (e.g., ImageNet), are not perfectly object-centric, usually provided without accurate object localization in the form of bounding boxes.
Our proposed framework leads to signiﬁcant accuracy gains in long-tailed object detection and instance segmen-tation on LVIS [22], using object-centric images from Im-ageNet [11] and the Internet. In particular, for the task of object detection for rare objects, we observe a signiﬁcant boost from 13% to over 20% in average precision. For the task of instance segmentation, our approach even improves the accuracy on common objects. More importantly, unlike the baseline approaches, we do so without sacriﬁcing the accuracy on the frequent classes. Finally, we also explore combining our approach with existing techniques [56] that results in even better performance.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• Bringing the best of object-centric images to the long-tailed object detection on scene-centric images. 1Mosaic was exploited in [4, 9, 81], but mainly to combine multiple scene-centric images to simulate smaller object sizes or to increase the scene complexity, not to turn object-centric images into scene-centric ones.
• Algorithms for mosaicking and pseudo-labeling to miti-gate the domain discrepancy between two image types.
• A multi-stage training framework that leverages the pseudo scene-centric images (from object-centric im-ages) to improve the detector on scene-centric images.
• Extensive evaluation and analysis of the proposed ap-proach on the challenging LVIS benchmark [22]. 2.