Abstract 1.

Introduction
Predicting human motion from a historical pose se-quence is at the core of many applications in computer vision. Current state-of-the-art methods concentrate on learning motion contexts in the pose space, however, the high dimensionality and complex nature of human pose in-voke inherent difficulties in extracting such contexts.
In this paper, we instead advocate to model motion contexts in the joint trajectory space, as the trajectory of a joint is smooth, vectorial, and gives sufficient information to the model. Moreover, most existing methods consider only the dependencies between skeletal connected joints, disre-garding prior knowledge and the hidden connections be-tween geometrically separated joints. Motivated by this, we present a semi-constrained graph to explicitly encode skele-tal connections and prior knowledge, while adaptively learn implicit dependencies between joints.
We also explore the applications of our approach to a range of objects including human, fish, and mouse. Sur-prisingly, our method sets the new state-of-the-art perfor-mance on 4 different benchmark datasets, a remarkable highlight is that it achieves a 19.1% accuracy improve-ment over current state-of-the-art in average. To facili-tate future research, we have released our code at https:
//github.com/Pose-Group/MPT.
The ability for machines to anticipate and model hu-man motion dynamics is very much coveted [29] in a wide range of applications such as autonomous driving, human tracking, and regulating the response of a robot when in-teracting with humans. As a result, future motion predic-tion has attracted considerable attention in the past decade
[9, 41, 46, 6, 39].
Whereas existing methods achieve accurate prediction for a few immediate future frames, it is still difficult to ex-pect accurate and natural forecasting in the long-term since the information hidden in the conscious activity of a human is complex and high-dimensional [15]. To tackle the chal-lenge, we seek to reduce the complexity of motion context modeling at the base level, i.e. representation space level, and capture long range dependencies to yield accurate and natural prediction on both short-term and long-term.
Fundamentally, human motion prediction aims to learn a mapping function that bridges the historical skeleton pose sequence to the future pose sequence.
Poineering ap-proaches adopt Gaussian Processes [40], Hidden Markov
Models [20], and Restricted Boltzmann Machine [38], to predict future human skeleton poses. Unfortunately, these models impose strong assumptions such as Gaussian distri-butions on the motion dynamics, leading to unsatisfactory results.
Recent approaches explored using different sorts of deep neural networks to address the issue [24, 16, 36, 23, 19, 4, 45, 1, 35]. One line of work [8, 12, 13, 22] utilized recur-tage of being smooth and low dimensional.
Another severe limitation of existing works is that they consider only the connectivity between adjacent joints while ignoring the movement coordination between geo-metrically separated joints. Dissevering these additional cues results in insufficient context modeling and inaccurate prediction. To address this issue, [32] incorporates dense connections between each pair of joints, [7] engages in a dy-namic graph, and [22] adopts a multiscale graph to model the relations. However, the problem is still not efficiently addressed and useful prior knowledge, such as limb mirror symmetry tendency (e.g., symmetry tendency between two arms) and cross sides synchronization tendency (e.g., syn-chronization tendency between left arm and right leg), are ignored. In this paper, we propose a new graph convolu-tional network that uses a semi-constrained graph to explic-itly encode skeletal connection and useful prior knowledge, while adaptively learn flexible connections between joints.
We would like to highlight that the proposed convolutional network has an edge in adopting efficient matrix operations and maintaining constraints that facilitate the training.
Interestingly, most existing methods typically focus on 3D human motion prediction. In this paper, we explore ap-plying our approach to a range of objects including human, fish, and mouse. Extensive experiments are conducted on large benchmark datasets including H3.6M and CMU Mo-Cap, and on animal datasets that involve motions of fish and mouse. Empirically, our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods by a large margin (more than 19.1% accuracy gain) in both short-term and long-term motion predictions.
Our code is released, hoping to inspire future research.
Contributions To summarize, the key contributions of this paper are: 1) A new motion representation is proposed, which models motion contexts in the trajectory space in-stead of the traditional pose space. 2) A semi-constrained graph convolution network is presented to comprehensively learn the relationships between joints, which simultane-ously considers skeletal connection, prior knowledge, and implicit dependencies between joints. 3) Our method sets the new state-of-the-art, is applicable to a range of objects, and provides more interesting insights overall. 2.