Abstract
Human motion prediction is a challenging task due to the stochasticity and aperiodicity of future poses. Recently, graph convolutional network has been proven to be very ef-fective to learn dynamic relations among pose joints, which is helpful for pose prediction. On the other hand, one can abstract a human pose recursively to obtain a set of poses at multiple scales. With the increase of the abstraction level, the motion of the pose becomes more stable, which benefits pose prediction too. In this paper, we propose a novel Multi-Scale Residual Graph Convolution Network (MSR-GCN) for human pose prediction task in the manner of end-to-end.
The GCNs are used to extract features from fine to coarse scale and then from coarse to fine scale. The extracted fea-tures at each scale are then combined and decoded to ob-tain the residuals between the input and target poses. In-termediate supervisions are imposed on all the predicted poses, which enforces the network to learn more represen-tative features. Our proposed approach is evaluated on two standard benchmark datasets, i.e., the Human3.6M dataset and the CMU Mocap dataset. Experimental results demon-strate that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art ap-proaches. Code and pre-trained models are available at https://github.com/Droliven/MSRGCN. 1.

Introduction
Human motion prediction plays a critical role in many fields, such as human-computer interaction, autonomous driving, and video completion. Simple periodic motion pat-terns can be tackled by traditional methods such as hid-den Markov model [3], linear dynamic system [36], re-stricted Boltzmann machine [43], Gaussian process latent
*Corresponding author: nieyongwei@scut.edu.cn
Figure 1. A human pose can be abstracted step by step to obtain a series of poses from fine to coarse scale, by grouping joints in close proximity together and replacing the group with a single joint. variable models [45] and random forests [24], while more complex motion is intractable for these methods. The latest approaches are almost all data-driven methods with deep learning. However, considering the stochasticity and aperi-odicity of human motion, it still remains a challenging task to predict accurate future motion in long term giving ob-served arbitrary poses. The main difficulty is how to model the spatiotemporal dependencies of human poses.
Lots of prior efforts with Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [49, 28], Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [9, 34, 41, 42, 37, 11, 5, 2], and Generative Adversarial Net-[53, 10, 21, 12, 6, 44, 23], have been works (GANs) made for tackling the challenging task. However, they neglect the inner-frame kinematic dependencies between body joints. Although they have achieved success in some cases, the prediction accuracy depends on the size of con-volution filters and the stability of the frame-by-frame pre-diction. Nowadays, Graph Convolution Networks (GCNs) have been widely used in various fields as well as in the task of human motion prediction [33, 27, 7, 25, 29, 52, 39], which work very well for non-grid graph-structured data es-pecially for skeleton-based 3D human pose sequences. Re-cently, Mao et al. [33] jointly model spatial structure by
GCNs with learnable connectivity and temporal informa-tion via discrete cosine transformation (DCT) to predict hu-man motion. Li et al. [27] propose a dynamic multi-scale graph neural network within an encoder-decoder framework to extract deep features at multiple scales. Although these two works exhibit promising results on benchmark datasets, there is still space to be explored for more high-quality hu-man motion prediction.
In this paper, we propose a Multi-Scale Residual Graph
Convolution Network (MSR-GCN), as illustrated in Fig-ure 3, for 3D human motion prediction. By treating a hu-man pose as a fully connected graph whose vertices are the pose joints, we employ graph convolution networks to dy-namically learn the relations between all pairs of joints flex-ibly regardless of the physical distance between them. But
GCN alone cannot capture the hierarchical structure of hu-man pose [33]. That is, as shown in Figure 1, one can ab-stract a human pose by grouping joints in close proximity together and representing the group by just one joint, yield-ing a coarser pose. Since a group of joints usually come from the same body part, gradually abstracting body parts in this way can significantly stabilize the motion pattern of the body. We find that the motion in the coarser level is more stable for which the pose prediction is easier.
It is promising to predict the poses in the coarsest level firstly, and then go up to finer levels gradually.
Based on the above analysis, we compensate GCN with the capacity of modeling hierarchical and contextual infor-mation of human pose by designing multiple GCNs with a multi-scale architecture. A group of the GCNs forms a de-scending path to extract features from fine to coarse scale, followed by another group of GCNs that extract multi-scale features inversely along an ascending path. Based on these features, we predict poses at all scales and impose interme-diate supervision for more representative features. We also add residual connections between the input and the output poses as suggested by [33], making the whole framework learn residuals instead of the target poses directly.
Note that Li et al. [27] have also observed this natural hi-erarchical structure of human pose, but they aim to extract rich features with the help of the multi-scale joint abstrac-tion and then decode the future poses from the multi-scale features with a recurrent decoder. In contrast, the encoder and decoder in our method are organized in a U-Net-like multi-scale manner equipped with intermediate losses, dif-fering from the multiscale strategy in [27].
In short, our main technical contributions are as follows:
• We propose a novel multi-scale residual graph convo-lution network for human pose prediction in an end-to-end manner, which consists of multiple GCNs orga-nized in a multi-scale architecture.
• The well-designed descending and ascending GCN blocks can extract features in both fine-to-coarse and coarse-to-fine manners.
• The intermediate supervision imposed at each scale enforces to learn more representative features, bene-fiting high-quality future prediction. 2.