Abstract
A few-shot font generation (FFG) method has to sat-isfy two objectives: the generated images should preserve the underlying global structure of the target character and present the diverse local reference style. Existing FFG methods aim to disentangle content and style either by ex-tracting a universal representation style or extracting mul-tiple component-wise style representations. However, pre-vious methods either fail to capture diverse local styles or cannot be generalized to a character with unseen compo-nents, e.g., unseen language systems. To mitigate the is-sues, we propose a novel FFG method, named Multiple Lo-calized Experts Few-shot Font Generation Network (MX-Font). MX-Font extracts multiple style features not explic-itly conditioned on component labels, but automatically by multiple experts to represent different local concepts, e.g., left-side sub-glyph. Owing to the multiple experts, MX-Font can capture diverse local concepts and show the general-izability to unseen languages. During training, we utilize component labels as weak supervision to guide each ex-pert to be specialized for different local concepts. We for-mulate the component assign problem to each expert as the graph matching problem, and solve it by the Hungar-ian algorithm. We also employ the independence loss and the content-style adversarial loss to impose the content-style disentanglement. In our experiments, MX-Font outper-forms previous state-of-the-art FFG methods in the Chinese generation and cross-lingual, e.g., Chinese to Korean, gen-eration. Source code is available at https://github. com/clovaai/mxfont. 1.

Introduction
A few-shot font generation task (FFG) [35, 45, 9, 34, 4, 5, 31] aims to generate a new font library using only a few reference glyphs, e.g., less than 10 glyph images, without additional model fine-tuning at the test time. FFG is espe-*Hyunjung Shim is a corresponding author.
Figure 1. Cross-lingual few-shot font generation results by MX-Font. With only four references, the proposed method, MX-Font, can generate a high quality font library. Furthermore, we first show the effectiveness of the proposed method on the zero-shot cross-lingual few-shot generation task, i.e., generating unseen Korean glyphs using the Chinese font generation model. cially a desirable task when designing a new font library for glyph-rich scripts, e.g., Chinese (> 50K glyphs), Ko-rean (≈ 11K glyphs), or Thai (≈ 11K glyphs). It is because the traditional font design process is very labor-intensive due to the complex characteristics of the font domain. An-other real-world scenario of FFG is to extend an existing font design to different language systems. For example, an international multi-media content, such as a video game or movie designed with a creative font, is required to re-design coherent style fonts for different languages.
A high-quality font design is obliged to satisfy two ob-jectives. First, the generated glyph should maintain all the detailed structure of the target character, particularly impor-tant for glyph-rich scripts with highly complex structure.
For example, even very small damages on a local compo-nent of a Chinese glyph can hurt the meaning of the target character. As another objective, a generated glyph should have a diverse local style of the reference glyphs, e.g., serif-ness, strokes, thickness, or size. To achieve both objectives, existing methods formulate FFG by disentangling the con-tent information and the style information from the given glyphs [35, 45, 9, 4, 31]. They combine the content features from the source glyph and the style features from the refer-Figure 2. Comparison of FFG methods. Three different groups of FFG are shown. All methods combine style representation fs from a few reference glyphs (Refs) by a style encoder (Es) and content representation fc from a source glyph (Source) by a content encoder (Ec). (a) Universal style representation methods extract only a single style feature for each font. (b) Component-conditioned methods extract component conditioned style features to capture diverse local styles (c) Multiple localized experts method (ours) generates multiple local features without an explicit condition, but attends different local information of the complex input glyph. The generated images in (a), (b) and (c) are synthesized by AGIS-Net [9], LF-Font [31] and MX-Font, respectively. ence glyphs to generate a glyph with the reference style.
Due to the complex nature of the font domain, the ma-jor challenge of FFG is to correctly disentangle the global content structure and the diverse local styles. However, as shown in our experiments, we observe that existing methods are insufficient to capture diverse local styles or to preserve the global structures of unseen language systems.
We categorize existing FFG methods into universal style representation methods (USR) [35, 45, 28, 9] and component-conditioned methods (CC) [4, 31]. USR meth-ods extract only a single style representation for each style – see Figure 2 (a). As glyph images are highly complex, these methods often fail to capture diverse local styles. To ad-dress the issue, CC methods utilize compositionality; a char-acter can be decomposed into a number of sub-characters, or components – see Figure 2 (b). They explicitly extract component-conditioned features, beneficial to preserve the local component information. Despite their promising per-formances, their encoder is tightly coupled with specific component labels of the target language domain, which hin-ders processing the glyphs with unseen components or con-ducting a cross-lingual font generation.
In this paper, we propose a novel few-shot font gen-eration method, named Multiple Localized eXperts Few-shot Font Generation Network (MX-Font), capturing mul-tiple local styles, but not limited to a specific language sys-tem. MX-Font has a multi-headed encoder, named multi-ple localized experts. Each localized expert is specialized for different local sub-concepts from the given complex glyph image. Unlike component-conditioned methods, our experts are not explicitly mapped to a specific component, but each expert implicitly learns different local concepts by weak supervision i.e. component and style classifiers. To prevent that different experts learn the same local compo-nent, we formulate the component label allocation problem as a matching problem, optimally solved by the Hungar-ian algorithm [23] (Figure 4). We also employ the inde-pendence loss and the content-style adversarial loss to en-force the content-style disentanglement by each localized expert. Interestingly, with only weak component-wise su-pervision (i.e. image-level not pixel-level labels), we ob-serve that each localized expert is specialized for differ-ent local areas, e.g., attending the left-side of the image (Figure 7). While we inherit the advantage of component-conditioned methods [4, 31] by introducing the multiple lo-cal features, our method is not limited to a specific language by removing the explicit component dependency in extract-ing features. Consequently, MX-Font outperforms the state-of-the-art FFG in two scenarios: in-domain transfer sce-nario, training and tested on the same language, and zero-shot cross-lingual transfer scenario, training and tested on different languages. Our ablation and model analysis sup-port that the proposed modules and optimization objectives are important to capture multiple diverse local concepts. 2.