Abstract
Barrel distortion rectiﬁcation aims at removing the ra-dial distortion in a distorted image captured by a wide-angle lens. Previous deep learning methods mainly solve this problem by learning the implicit distortion parameters or the nonlinear rectiﬁed mapping function in a direct man-ner. However, this type of manner results in an indistinct learning process of rectiﬁcation and thus limits the deep perception of distortion. In this paper, inspired by the cur-riculum learning, we analyze the barrel distortion rectiﬁ-cation task in a progressive and meaningful manner. By considering the relationship among different construction levels in an image, we design a multi-level curriculum that disassembles the rectiﬁcation task into three levels, struc-ture recovery, semantics embedding, and texture rendering.
With the guidance of the curriculum that corresponds to the construction of images, the proposed hierarchical architec-ture enables a progressive rectiﬁcation and achieves more accurate results. Moreover, we present a novel distortion-aware pre-training strategy to facilitate the initial learning of neural networks, promoting the model to converge faster and better. Experimental results on the synthesized and real-world distorted image datasets show that the proposed approach signiﬁcantly outperforms other learning methods, both qualitatively and quantitatively. 1.

Introduction
Rectifying the distorted images is an indispensable pre-processing step for most computer vision tasks since the ge-ometric distortion changes the original scene distribution.
Recent works [25][32][31][16][19][17][5] learn the barrel distortion rectiﬁcation model in a direct manner, which feeds distorted images into networks and only supervises
*Corresponding author the ﬁnal outputs. Despite the end-to-end architecture, di-rectly learning such a complex nonlinear mapping function between different domains (from the distortion domain into the alignment domain) is challenging. The pixel-level su-pervision on ﬁnal output cannot fully guide the rectiﬁcation of geometry distribution. Moreover, this process cannot ex-plicitly reason different construction levels of a distorted image, limiting the models’ learning of the distortion fea-tures in rectiﬁcation task. Thus, previous direct learning manners hinder the performance improvement of the rec-tiﬁcation algorithm. In this paper, inspired by curriculum learning [4], we consider improving the barrel distortion rectiﬁcation in a progressive and meaningful manner.
Curriculum learning, proposed by Bengio [4], is one general paradigm that introduces a guided and meaningful strategy to train a machine learning model. By imitating the learning process of humans, the model can converge faster by learning different knowledge at different learning stages based on a curriculum. Inspired by this process, we con-struct a multi-level curriculum to train the deep barrel dis-tortion rectiﬁcation model. As illustrated in Fig. 1 (a), sim-ilar to human painting from sketch, coloring to details, the procedure of our curriculum displays a simple-to-complex order from the structure, semantics to texture.
Additionally, to facilitate the initial learning of the recti-ﬁcation model, we propose a distortion-aware pre-training strategy. Pre-training on ImageNet [14] is a widely used strategy in computer vision. Nevertheless, He et al.
[9] veriﬁed that it helps less if the target task is more sensi-tive to localization. Thus, it is not suitable for the recti-ﬁcation task requiring a precise coordinate transformation.
Pre-training on ImageNet was demonstrated that it counts against the distortion estimation task in [18] as ImageNet does not contain any distorted images. Since it is difﬁcult to make the model learn the implicit distortion parameters, our distortion-aware pre-training strategy permits the model a better network initialization and helps to perceive how dis-k1 k2 k3 k4
-5.8e-6 1.7e-12 -9.8e-15 -1.7e-19
-6.2e-6 4.5e-10 1.7e-15 -7.7e-19 3.7e-9 -3.0e-16 1.1e-19 1.3e-8
...
...
...
...
Hard
Implicit and heterogeneous  labels
Structure
Semantics
Texture
Distorted Image
Sketch
Coloring
Detail
Distorted Image
Slight d 1.0
... 3.0
... 5.0
... 7.0
Visually observable and  homogeneous labels
}
}
}
Moderate
Strong
Easy (a) Multi-level curriculum and the human painting  procedure (b) Distortion-aware pre-training focuses on the general concept  rather than obscure details
Figure 1. Motivation of the proposed method. (a) Similar to the human painting procedure (the bottom), the constructed curriculum (the top) addresses the barrel distortion rectiﬁcation task into three levels, structure, semantics, and texture. (b) Instead of the implicit and detailed distortion parameters (top), the distortion-aware pre-training strategy focuses on the explicit and general distortion level (bottom). torted the image is, as shown in Fig. 1 (b).
In particular, we propose a multi-level curriculum with a distortion-aware pre-training strategy for training the deep barrel distortion rectiﬁcation model. First, we construct a curriculum with three levels, structure, semantics, and tex-ture. The curriculum is also related to the construction of an image, as Marr [22] emphasized understanding an image is a multiple stages procedure, where different components at different construction levels of an image are strongly linked. Subsequently, we develop a distortion-aware pre-training strategy to enhance the distortion perception of the model, teaching it to grasp the general prior knowledge of distortion rather than obscure details. To gradually learn the image rectiﬁcation, we design a hierarchical framework consisting of three modules, structure recovery, semantics embedding, and texture rendering. Such an architecture en-ables the progressive rectiﬁcation from the low-level fea-tures to high-level features. Compared with previous meth-ods, the proposed rectiﬁcation process can tackle the barrel distortion by supervising the intermediate product of each module. Experimental results on the synthesized and real-world datasets demonstrate our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art methods with a large margin.
In general, our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose a curriculum to train the deep barrel dis-tortion rectiﬁcation model in a progressive and mean-ingful manner.
• A distortion-aware pre-training strategy is proposed to enhance the initialization of the learning model.
• To learn the proposed multi-level curriculum, we de-sign an effective hierarchical rectiﬁcation framework. 2.