Abstract
In this paper, we investigate video summarization in the supervised setting. Since video summarization is subjec-tive to the preference of the end-user, the design of a unique model is limited.
In this work, we propose a model that provides personalized video summaries by conditioning the summarization process with predefined categorical user la-bels referred to as preferences. The underlying method is based on multiple pairwise rankers (called Multi-ranker), where the rankers are trained jointly to provide local sum-maries as well as a global summarization of a given video.
In order to demonstrate the relevance and applications of our method in contrast with a classical global summarizer, we conduct experiments on multiple benchmark datasets, notably through a user study and comparisons with the state-of-art methods in the global video summarization task. 1.

Introduction
Video summarization is an important subfield of video understanding. It aims to provide the end-user with a syn-opsis of the original video capturing only the relevant con-tent. Various applications can benefit from video summa-rization, including semantic video editing and content fil-tering in particular. Moreover, the summary can also be used as a preprocessing step by excluding the unnecessary content and thus reducing the length and processing time of the video for downstream tasks such as action recognition.
Video summarization is often intertwined with highlight detection, which can be formulated as a subset selection problem based on a learnt model that assigns an importance score for each video frame or segment. In contrast, video summarization seeks a synopsis that not only contains the video highlight, but also satisfies other criteria, such as the diversity, representativeness, visual and semantic coherence of the summary. In addition, the ability for storytelling and adaptability to the context is often considered. A substan-*corresponding author
Figure 1. Given the test video 9 from TVSum dataset and its frame-level importance scores (gray), our Multi-ranker method trained with 4 preferences (cyan, magenta, yellow, black) can generate local/personalized summaries according to a subset of preferences and a global summary akin to classical summarization methods. tial work has been done in different topics in this research area notably in highlight detection and video summariza-tion. Many of these works are based on a novel specific key insight or heuristic that takes into consideration one or more of summarization criteria [38, 13, 12, 73, 57, 51] along with a particular model setting such as supervised
[15, 67, 11, 39], weakly supervised [19, 25, 37, 42] and unsupervised [62, 33, 73, 23] learning.
In practice, what is meaningful in a video is a subjec-tive matter that depends on the end user perspective, which represents one of the main challenges in this research topic
[48, 53]. However, few works in the literature were inter-ested in exploring the possibility of customizing the gener-ated summary [10, 41, 46, 54]. Since there is no consensus on what constitutes a global summary, suggesting a model that generates a unique summary is restrictive for general users due to the diversity of their perspectives and opinions.
Instead, designing a model that can provide a set of sum-maries for the users to select is likely to satisfy specific user preferences. For instance, in a basketball match video con-taining many play actions (shooting, dribbling, slam dunk,
layup, etc.), a unique global summary might include all or some of these actions. However, each user has particular ac-tion preference, and we believe considering such preference will enable a more flexible personalized summarization.
For these purposes, we propose in this work a novel rank-ing based video summarization model, that is constituted of multiple sub-ranking models that are trained using pairwise comparisons between the importance scores of video seg-ments to provide local summaries with respect to each pre-defined preference by ranking important segments higher than unimportant ones. Moreover, the sub-ranking models are jointly trained so that the maximum of their predicted ranking scores ensures a unique global summary akin to a standard ranking model trained using pairwise compar-isons. As a consequence, our model is capable of predict-ing a global ranking score and a set of local ranking scores according to each preference for a given video segment, enabling the possibility of interacting with the model by selecting one preference for a local summary generation, some preferences for a personalized summary generation, or all preferences for a global summary generation as illus-trated in Figure 1. We demonstrate the relevance and appli-cations of our method through quantitative and qualitative experiments in benchmark datasets.
In summary, our contributions are two-fold: 1) We show that a pairwise ranking based model can achieve state-of-art results in the task of supervised video summarization. 2) We propose a multiple pairwise ranking model endowed with a training scheme for generating a global summary as well as local and personalized summaries with respect to predefined preferences that the end-user can interact with. 2.