Abstract
We recover high-frequency information encoded in the shadows cast by an object to estimate a hemispherical pho-tograph from the viewpoint of the object, effectively turn-ing objects into cameras. Estimating environment maps is useful for advanced image editing tasks such as relighting, object insertion or removal, and material parameter esti-mation. Because the problem is ill-posed, recent works in illumination recovery have tackled the problem of low-frequency lighting for object insertion, rely upon specular surface materials, or make use of data-driven methods that are susceptible to hallucination without physically plausi-ble constraints. We incorporate an optimization scheme to update scene parameters that could enable practical capture of real-world scenes. Furthermore, we develop a methodology for evaluating expected recovery performance for different types and shapes of objects. 1.

Introduction
Consider a small object sitting on a desk in your living room. The object is illuminated by light sources from all directions—this includes direct sources such as the sun or overhead lights, but also indirect sources, like the foliage outside that scatters sunlight through your window. The ap-pearance of the object and the surface that it rests upon re-sults from the complex interaction between the incident il-lumination and the geometry and material properties of the object and the desk. In this paper we ask the question—if the geometry and material properties of the observed scene are known, how well can we reconstruct the incident illumi-nation pattern?
If we assume that the illumination sources are distant rel-ative to the size of the observed object, then we can repre-sent this illumination as a hemispherical photograph taken from the perspective of the object. Thus, by using our
Figure 1. (Top) Observing the area around a small, bunny-shaped object (top-left), can we recover occluded viewpoints only visible from the bunny’s perspective? (Bottom) Given the surface geom-etry of an object (bottom-left), we estimate the incident illumina-tion, and in some cases, the unknown diffuse albedo of the surface surrounding the object. knowledge about an object to accurately estimate the illu-mination incident upon it, we effectively turn the object into a camera.
In this paper, we primarily make use of shadows cast by an object onto nearby surfaces. Cast shadows are particu-larly easy to interpret when an object is illuminated from a single direction. For example, one can immediately deter-mine the position of the sun by looking at a sundial. Esti-mating the illumination incident from all directions simul-taneously is more challenging, and is a linear but ill-posed inverse problem.
Prior methods are commonly limited to controlled cap-ture methodologies. Some rely upon object’s shading or specular highlights and thus require the bidirectional re-ﬂectance distribution function (BRDF) or precise surface normal information. Our method relies on cast shadows and requires only the shape of the object and the shape and albedo of the shadowed surface. Previous works that utilize cast shadows require planar objects that cast shadows onto planar surfaces. We aim to support complex 3D objects in a general framework applicable to most natural objects and scenes.
We require partial reconstruction of the visible scene sur-face, such as from a stereo camera pair, or utilize known object geometry and relative camera orientation. Our esti-mates are performed by jointly optimizing for scene param-eters using this partial set of views to approximate the ray transport matrix. Once we have estimated the ray transport matrix, further estimates only require a single photograph of the scene. 1.1. Contributions
• Recover high-frequency environment map from object shadows that does not require a special setup, specular object, or low-frequency assumptions
• Propose a practical technique for approximating the light transport of an arbitrary object in a natural set-ting from a restricted set of partial viewpoints
• Demonstrate a strategy for solving the inverse problem
“in the wild” for a scene with unknown surface mate-rial and using just a single photograph.
• Examine the structure of the ray transport matrix to determine feasible regions of reconstruction and assess the object-camera performance 2.