Abstract
In the image domain, excellent representations can be learned by inducing invariance to content-preserving trans-formations via noise contrastive learning. In this paper, we generalize contrastive learning to a wider set of transforma-tions, and their compositions, for which either invariance or distinctiveness is sought. We show that it is not imme-diately obvious how existing methods such as SimCLR can be extended to do so. Instead, we introduce a number of formal requirements that all contrastive formulations must satisfy, and propose a practical construction which satisﬁes these requirements. In order to maximise the reach of this analysis, we express all components of noise contrastive formulations as the choice of certain generalized transfor-mations of the data (GDTs), including data sampling. We then consider videos as an example of data in which a large variety of transformations are applicable, accounting for the extra modalities – for which we analyze audio and text – and the dimension of time. We ﬁnd that being invariant to certain transformations and distinctive to others is crit-ical to learning effective video representations, improving the state-of-the-art for multiple benchmarks by a large mar-gin, and even surpassing supervised pretraining. Code and pretrained models are available1. t3 mv ma mv ma mv ma mv ma t4 r0 r1 r0 r1 r0 r1 r0 r1 r0 r1 r0 r1 r0 r1 r0 r1 t5 g01 g02 g03 g04 g05 g06 g07 g08 g09 g10 g11 g12 g13 g14 g15 g16
T01
T02
T03
T04
T05
T06
T07
T08
T09
T10
T11
T12
T13
T14
T15
T16 t2
⌧1
⌧2
⌧3
⌧4
. . . t1 i1 1 i2
. . . iMi
Fig. 1: Hierarchical sampling process of generalized data transformations (GDTs). Shown here are the ﬁve transfor-mations analyzed for the audio-visual training case and their compositions: data-sampling (t1), time-shift (t2), modality splicing (t3), time-reversal (t4), and augmentation trans-formations, g (t5) to learn video representations via noise contrastive learning. 1.

Introduction
Works such as MoCo [31], SimCLR [13], SwAV [12] and BYOL [25] have shown that it is possible to pre-train state-of-the-art image representations without the use of any manually-provided labels. Furthermore, many of these ap-proaches use variants of noise contrastive learning [26, 27].
*Joint ﬁrst authors 1https://github.com/facebookresearch/GDT
Their idea is to learn a representation that is invariant to trans-formations that leave the meaning of an image unchanged (e.g. geometric distortion or cropping) and distinctive to changes that are likely to alter its meaning (e.g. replacing an image with another chosen at random).
These prior works have also shown that the choice of transformations is of primary importance for perfor-mance [12, 13]. This is not just a matter of selecting a
certain type of transformation, but also to specify how dif-ferent transformations should be composed, and how these compositions should be sampled to from batches for training the model. So far, these choices have been mostly driven by intuition, with little formal understanding of why certain choices may be preferable, and how these choices can be generalized.
In this work, we answer some of these questions via a for-mal analysis of composable transformations in contrastive learning. Our analysis shows how invariance and distinc-tiveness to individual transformations can be meaningfully incorporated in the same learning formulation. It also pro-vides some principles to guide the construction of the train-ing batches. We interpret existing sampling schemes, such as the one in SimCLR, as special cases with certain potential advantages and disadvantages. We do so by showing how these constructions can be extended systematically to any composition of invariant and distinctive transformations.
Furthermore, we demonstrate the utility of our analysis by exploring contrastive methods for learning representations of video data. Compared to images, videos contain a time dimension and multiple modalities, which have been shown to provide effective learning cues; for instance [60] leverages multiple modalities, and [15, 41] the time dimension. We show how these effects can be incorporated in a uniform manner in contrastive learning by considering a suitable class of generalized data transformations (GDTs). GDTs capture standard augmentations, as well as temporal transformations, modality slicing and data sampling. The advantages of using
GDTs is that they allow us to base the entire design of the learning formulation (e.g., how to write a coherent learning objective and how to sample batches) on a small number of design principles that our analysis has identiﬁed.
With this, we make some notable ﬁndings for contrastive video representation learning. First, we show that using this wider class of transformations greatly exceeds the per-formance that can be obtained by a vanilla applications of image-centric methods such as SimCLR to video data. By leveraging time and multiple modalities, we obtain large per-formance gains, almost doubling the performance. Second, we show that just learning representations that are invariant to more and more transformations is not optimal, at least when it comes to video data; instead, combining invariance to certain factors with distinctiveness to others performs bet-ter. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time such an effect has been demonstrated in contrastive learning.
We also set the new state of the art in audio-visual rep-resentation learning, with both small and large video pre-training datasets on a variety of downstream tasks. In par-ticular, we achieve 94.1% and 67.4% on the standardized
UCF-101 [67] and HMDB-51 [42] action recognition bench-marks, when pretrained on HowTo100M [50], and 95.2% and 72.8% respectively when pretrained on IG65M [21]. 2.