Abstract 1.

Introduction
Current state-of-the-art two-stage detectors generate oriented proposals through time-consuming schemes. This diminishes the detectors’ speed, thereby becoming the com-putational bottleneck in advanced oriented object detection systems. This work proposes an effective and simple ori-ented object detection framework, termed Oriented R-CNN, which is a general two-stage oriented detector with promis-ing accuracy and efficiency. To be specific, in the first stage, we propose an oriented Region Proposal Network (oriented
RPN) that directly generates high-quality oriented propos-als in a nearly cost-free manner. The second stage is ori-ented R-CNN head for refining oriented Regions of Interest (oriented RoIs) and recognizing them. Without tricks, ori-ented R-CNN with ResNet50 achieves state-of-the-art de-tection accuracy on two commonly-used datasets for ori-ented object detection including DOTA (75.87% mAP) and
HRSC2016 (96.50% mAP), while having a speed of 15.1
FPS with the image size of 1024×1024 on a single RTX 2080Ti. We hope our work could inspire rethinking the design of oriented detectors and serve as a baseline for oriented object detection. Code is available at https:
//github.com/jbwang1997/OBBDetection.
*Corresponding author.
+ denotes the official version of RoI Trans-former implemented on AerialDetection (the same below).
Most existing state-of-the-art oriented object detection methods [7, 37, 41] depend on proposal-driven frameworks, like Fast/Faster R-CNN [11, 10, 32]. They involve two key steps: (i) generating oriented proposals and (ii) refining pro-posals and classifying them into different categories. Nev-ertheless, the step of producing oriented proposals is com-putationally expensive.
One of the early methods of generating oriented pro-posals is rotated Region Proposal Network (rotated RPN for short) [26], which places 54 anchors with different an-gles, scales and aspect rations (3 scales×3 ratios×6 an-gles) on each location, as shown in Figure 1(a). The intro-duction of rotated anchors improves the recall and demon-strates good performance when the oriented objects dis-tribute sparsely. However, abundant anchors cause massive computation and memory footprint. To address this issue,
RoI Transformer [7] learns oriented proposals from hori-zontal RoIs by complex process, which involves RPN, RoI
Alignment and regression (see Figure 1(b)). The RoI Trans-former scheme provides promising oriented proposals and drastically reduces the number of rotated anchors, but also brings about expensive computation cost. Now, how to de-sign an elegant and efficient solution to generate oriented proposals is the key to breaking the computational bottle-neck in state-of-the-art oriented detectors.
To push the envelope further: we investigate why the efficiency of region proposal-based oriented detectors has trailed thus far. Our observation is that the main obsta-cle impeding the speed of proposal-driven detectors is from the stage of proposal generation. A natural and intuitive question to ask is: can we design a general and simple oriented region proposal network (oriented RPN for short) to generate high-quality oriented proposals directly? Mo-tivated by this question, this paper presents a simple two-stage oriented object detection framework, called oriented
R-CNN, which obtains state-of-the-art detection accuracy, while keeping competitive efficiency in comparison with one-stage oriented detectors.
To be specific, in the first stage of oriented R-CNN, a conceptually simple oriented RPN is presented (see Figure 1(c)). Our oriented RPN is a kind of light-weight fully con-volutional network, which has extremely fewer parameters than rotated RPN and RoI transformer+, thus reducing the risk of overfitting. We realize it by changing the number of output parameters of RPN regression branch from four to six. There is no such thing as a free lunch. The de-sign of oriented RPN benefits from our proposed represen-tation scheme of oriented objects, named midpoint offset representation. For arbitrary-oriented objects in images, we utilize six parameters to represent them. The midpoint off-set representation inherits horizontal regression mechanism, as well as provides bounded constraints for predicting ori-ented proposals. The second stage of oriented R-CNN is oriented R-CNN detection head: extracting the features of each oriented proposal by rotated RoI alignment and per-forming classification and regression.
Without bells and whistles, we evaluate our oriented R-CNN on two popular benchmarks for oriented object de-tection, namely DOTA and HRSC2016. Our method with
ResNet-50-FPN surpasses the accuracy of all existing state-of-the-art detectors, achieving 75.87% mAP on the DOTA dataset and 96.50% mAP on the HRSC2016 dataset, while running at 15.1 FPS with the image size of 1024×1024 on a single RTX 2080Ti. Thus, the oriented R-CNN is a prac-tical object detection framework in terms of both accuracy and efficiency. We hope our method will inspire rethink-ing the design of oriented object detectors and oriented ob-ject regression scheme, as well as serve as a solid baseline for oriented object detection. For future research, our code is available at https://github.com/jbwang1997/
OBBDetection. 2.