Abstract
In this paper we consider the epipolar geometry between orthographic and perspective cameras. We generalize many of the classical results for the perspective essential matrix to this setting and derive novel minimal solvers, not only for the calibrated case, but also for partially calibrated and non-central camera setups. While orthographic cameras might seem exotic, they occur naturally in many applica-tions. They can e.g. model 2D maps (such as ﬂoor plans), aerial/satellite photography and even approximate narrow
ﬁeld-of-view cameras (e.g. from telephoto lenses). In our experiments we highlight various applications of the devel-oped theory and solvers, including Radar-Camera calibra-tion and aligning Structure-from-Motion models to aerial or satellite images. 1.

Introduction
In this paper we direct our attention at something that, at
ﬁrst glance, might seem like an exotic creature in the land of epipolar geometry, namely the essential matrix for mixed orthographic and perspective cameras. By this we mean the geometry of a two-view scene, where one camera is a fully calibrated perspective camera and the other is an or-thographic camera. A schematic of the geometry is given in
Figure 1. This case was ﬁrst considered by Zhang et al. in
[27] where the ortho-perspective essential matrix was de-rived. In this work we extend their analysis and derive a parallel theory to the classical results for the perspective es-sential matrix. Additionally we consider the case where the perspective camera is only partially calibrated (unknown fo-cal length) or when it is a non-central (generalized) camera.
For each of the cases we derive novel minimal solvers which allow for robust estimation in RANSAC [3] frameworks.
While optical systems that yield true orthographic pro-jections are not commonplace, the orthographic camera is
∗Funded by the strategic research projects ELLIIT and eSSENCE, and the H2020 ECSEL JU project ADACORSA under GA 876019
Figure 1. Orthographic-Perspective Epipolar Geometry applicable in many other settings. For example, 2D-maps such as ﬂoor plans can be seen as an overhead orthographic image of the scene. Thus registering a camera to a 2D map is equivalent to relative pose estimation between an ortho-graphic image and a perspective one. Orthographic projec-tion can also approximate perspective projection in the case of narrow ﬁeld-of-view or when the distance to the scene is large. In the experiments we will show that using this approximation can even be preferable to the full perspec-tive model when the focal length needs to be estimated as well. Furthermore, while the camera models used for satel-lite or aerial photography are often complicated, they are also well-approximated by the simpler orthographic model.