Abstract
Rigid registration of point clouds with partial overlaps is a longstanding problem usually solved in two steps: (a)
ﬁnding correspondences between the point clouds; (b) ﬁl-tering these correspondences to keep only the most reliable ones to estimate the transformation. Recently, several deep nets have been proposed to solve these steps jointly. We built upon these works and propose PCAM: a neural net-work whose key element is a pointwise product of cross-attention matrices that permits to mix both low-level geo-metric and high-level contextual information to ﬁnd point correspondences. These cross-attention matrices also per-mits the exchange of context information between the point clouds, at each layer, allowing the network construct bet-ter matching features within the overlapping regions. The experiments show that PCAM achieves state-of-the-art re-sults among methods which, like us, solve steps (a) and (b) jointly via deepnets. 1.

Introduction
Point cloud registration is the problem of estimating the
It has rigid transformation that aligns two point clouds. many applications in various domains such as autonomous driving, motion and pose estimation, 3D reconstruction, si-multaneous localisation and mapping (SLAM), and aug-mented reality. The most famous method to solve this task is ICP [3], for which several improvements have been pro-posed, modifying the original optimisation process [40, 45] or using geometric feature descriptors [32] to match points.
Recently, end-to-end learning-based methods combining point feature extraction, point matching, and point-pairs ﬁl-tering, have been developed to solve this task. Deep Closest
Point (DCP) [38], improved by PRNet [37], ﬁnds point cor-respondences via an attention matrix and estimate the trans-∗Most of the work was done during an internship at valeo.ai in 2020.
†Inria, Mines ParisTech, PSL Research University. formation by solving a least-squares problem. Deep Global
Registration (DGR) [7] tackles partial-to-partial point cloud registration by ﬁnding corresponding points via deep fea-tures, computing conﬁdence scores for these pairs, and solv-ing a weighted least-squares problem to estimate the trans-formation. IDAM [23] considers all possible pairs of points in a similarity matrix computed using deep or hand-crafted features, and proposes a learned two-step ﬁlter to select only relevant pairs for transformation estimation. Finally,
[9, 12, 41] use deep networks and the Sinkhorn algorithm to ﬁnd and ﬁlter corresponding points.
Our observation is that, when matching points between point clouds, one would like to ﬁnd correspondences using both local ﬁne geometric information, to precisely select the best corresponding point, and high-level contextual infor-mation, to differentiate between points with similar local geometry but from different parts of the scene. The ﬁne ge-ometric information is naturally extracted at the ﬁrst layers of a deep convnet, while the context information is found in the deepest layers. The existing deep registration meth-ods estimate the correspondences between point clouds us-ing features extracted at the deepest layers. Therefore, there is no explicit control on the amount of ﬁne geometric and high-level context information encoded in these features.
Instead, we propose to compute point correspondences at every layer of our deep network via cross-attention ma-trices, and to combine these matrices via a point-wise mul-tiplication. This simple yet very effective solution natu-rally ensures that both low-level geometric and high-level context information are exploited when matching points. It also permits to remove spurious matches found only at one scale. Furthermore, we also exploit these cross-attention matrices to exchange information between the point clouds at each layer, allowing the network to exploit context in-formation from both point clouds to ﬁnd the best matching point within the overlapping regions.
The design of our method is inspired by DGR [7], DCP
[38] and PRNet [37]. We exploit cross-attention matrices to exchange context information between point clouds, like in
[38, 37, 12], to ﬁnd the best matches within overlapping re-gion. Our main contribution is to propose to compute such cross-attention matrices at every network layer and to com-bine them to exploit both ﬁne and high-level information when matching points. Our second contribution is to show that our method achieves state-of-the-art results on two real datasets (indoor, outdoor) and on a synthetic one. 2.