Abstract
Semantic segmentation models trained on public datasets have achieved great success in recent years. How-ever, these models didn’t consider the personalization issue of segmentation though it is important in practice. In this paper, we address the problem of personalized image seg-mentation. The objective is to generate more accurate seg-mentation results on unlabeled personalized images by in-vestigating the data’s personalized traits. To open up future research in this area, we collect a large dataset containing various users’ personalized images called PSS (Personal-ized Semantic Segmentation). We also survey some recent researches related to this problem and report their perfor-mance on our dataset. Furthermore, by observing the cor-relation among a user’s personalized images, we propose a baseline method that incorporates the inter-image context when segmenting certain images. Extensive experiments show that our method outperforms the existing methods on the proposed dataset. The code and the PSS dataset are available at https://mmcheng.net/pss/. 1.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a well-studied task in the com-puter vision society. The goal of this task is to assign a semantic label to each pixel of a given image. As with other computer vision tasks, deep learning has greatly em-powered semantic segmentation [4,5,30,33,37,57,58] with its great representation learning ability. These state-of-the-art methods mainly focus on the publicly available datasets like Pascal VOC [10], ADE20K [61], CityScapes [7], in which images are assumed to be independent and identi-cally distributed. However, this assumption does not stand in real-world scenarios. For example, in mobile photog-raphy, a user may take pictures to record his/her own life and form a personalized image set. On the one hand, the personalized data does not have an identical distribution with public datasets, leading to a generalization issue when
*MM Cheng is the corresponding author.
Figure 1. Samples of the proposed personalized image dataset. We investigate how to utilize the personalized property of users’ im-ages when adapting from source data. One notable property we can observe is that images from the same user are correlated (sim-ilar objects, scenes, etc.). adopting well-trained segmentation models trained on pub-lic datasets. On the other hand, as shown in Fig. 1, images from the same user are correlated. It yields potential studies on utilizing this interrelated property to facilitate segmenta-tion.
This paper addresses personalized image segmentation, a problem that has not been discussed in previous works.
The difficulties mainly lie in the following two aspects: (i)
Firstly, there exists a large distribution gap between the pub-lic datasets and a user’s personal data. A simple method is to use extra annotations of the user’s data to train the model, which is very costly. So it is urged to learn directly from unlabeled personalized data. However, there is no available personalized dataset to learn. (ii) Additionally, the person-alized images from the same user usually have some per-sonal traits. How to properly utilize these personalized traits in semantic segmentation remains an unaddressed problem.
Despite the above difficulties, there are great demands for the personalized image segmentation in practice. For ex-ample, camera apps may need to generate high-quality seg-mentation masks for user’s images to assist photography. To tackle these challenges and open up further studies on per-sonalized image segmentation, we propose a personalized
dataset called PSS and a baseline personalized segmenta-tion method based on the proposed dataset.
The PSS dataset contains 15 individual users’ personal-ized images, resulting in 10080 images in total. For each user’s personalized data, we randomly select around 30% of images and annotate their pixel-level semantic masks for validation. For easier adaptation from existing datasets to our personalized data, we consider the 20 common object classes as in the PASCAL VOC [10] dataset. To our knowl-edge, the PSS dataset is the first dataset that focuses on the personalization issue of image segmentation. It enables re-searchers to study segmentation problems by utilizing per-sonalized traits.
On the challenge of learning with personal traits, previ-ous studies on vision tasks’ personalization issues [16, 22, 40] usually extract a global memory from personal data to represent the user’s preference or personality. The extracted memory is then adopted as a prior for specific downstream tasks. However, we consider personalization from a broader perspective, i.e., the personal traits lie in each person’s im-ages, which is unnecessary to be extracted as a global repre-sentation. In fact, experiments indicate that a global repre-sentation extracted for a user fails in our scenario. The fail-ure is reasonable since in the semantic segmentation prob-lem, we need to predict the class of each pixel for an im-age. Though certain users’ images have their character-istics, there are still various classes of objects and scenes among these images. A global representation for all pixels would be too ambiguous. To avoid the ambiguity of global representation while learning to segment with personalized traits. We propose to investigate the contextual connection between personalized images and utilize them among cor-related images locally. Specifically, we first cluster a per-son’s images into several groups so that images from the same group share similar objects or backgrounds. Then within each group, we extract multiple local region repre-sentations. For the prediction of each pixel in that group, we consult with correlated regional representations using an attention mechanism.
Note that no labeled training images are provided in the proposed personalized dataset. We tackle this problem by domain adaptation from the existing labeled dataset (as source) to the personalized images (as target). There are many works on the problem of unsupervised domain adap-tion semantic segmentation (UDASS) [3, 9, 23, 25, 28, 34, 35, 50]. While our personalized images are correlated with each other, current UDASS methods all treat target images as independently distributed. They can’t capture the person-ality traits in the personal data. In our baseline approach, we incorporate a group context module into the domain adapta-tion framework. It allows the network to adapt from existing dataset to the personalized images while taking advantage of the personal traits in the personalized images.
The contributions of this work are two folds:
• We first propose the personalization issue of image se-mantic segmentation and collect a personalized image dataset called PSS, containing 15 different users’ data.
• We select some recent works related to this problem and report their performances on our dataset. Further-more, we propose a baseline method that studies per-sonal traits by learning local region representations.
The approach achieves state-of-the-art performance on the proposed personalized dataset. 2.