Abstract
Fine-grained 3D segmentation is an important task in 3D object understanding, especially in applications such as intelligent manufacturing or parts analysis for 3D ob-jects. However, many challenges involved in such prob-lem are yet to be solved, such as i) interpreting the com-plex structures located in different regions for 3D objects; ii) capturing fine-grained structures with sufficient topol-ogy correctness. Current deep learning and graph ma-chine learning methods fail to tackle such challenges and thus provide inferior performance in fine-grained 3D anal-In this work, methods in topological data analysis ysis. are incorporated with geometric deep learning model for the task of fine-grained segmentation for 3D objects. We propose a novel neural network model called Persistent
Homology based Graph Convolution Network (PHGCN), which i) integrates persistent homology into graph convolu-tion network to capture multi-scale structural information that can accurately represent complex structures for 3D ob-jects; ii) applies a novel Persistence Diagram Loss (LP D) that provides sufficient topology correctness for segmenta-tion over the fine-grained structures. Extensive experiments on fine-grained 3D segmentation validate the effectiveness of the proposed PHGCN model and show significant im-provements over current state-of-the-art methods. 1.

Introduction
Fine-grained 3D semantic segmentation is a task to se-mantically classify the labeling of each 3D point input in detailed levels.
It is an essential task for many applica-tions for detailed processing and analysis of 3D shapes, such as intelligent manufacturing, automatic interior design and furniture arrangement, autonomous robotic manipula-tion, human-machine interaction, 3D clothing analysis.
Segmenting fine-grained 3D objects involves many chal-lenges, due to the specific properties in fine-grained 3D ob-jects, such as i) complex structures located in different re-gions; ii) shape-dependent topological structures (e.g, han-dles of objects, doorknobs, device wires). These properties always exhibit in slim parts or multiple small connected components, which are semantically important to down-stream tasks, such as robotic manipulation. Sufficiently in-terpreting such two main structures is essential for accu-rate 3D fine-grained semantic segmentation task. Failing to tackle such challenges will drastically lower the perfor-mance of semantically understanding the 3D fine-grained objects and produce incoherent segmentation output, which is vital for intelligent manufacturing and robotic manipula-tion.
In recent years, deep neural network based methods
[6, 16, 21] and geometric learning methods [15, 27, 28] have become the mainstream methods in 3D point cloud under-standing tasks, from general 3D object classification to se-mantic segmentation on objects and scenes. In retrospect to these methods, it is found that they are not designed specifically for the task of understanding fine-grained 3D objects with complex structures or shape dependent topo-logical structures. Methods in [15, 27, 28] apply graph neu-ral network (GNN) or graph convolutional network (GCN) model to extract features from geometrical structures in 3D point cloud. However, such approach only captures the pairwise relations represented by edges, since the neigh-boring graphs constructed in GNN/GCN model only rep-resent the pairwise relationships among 3D point clouds.
As a result, high dimensional relationships existed in com-plex structures of fine-grained 3D objects cannot be finely captured. The recent work PartNet model [31] applies cas-cade binary labeling to represent a top-down recursive parts decomposition for hierarchical segmentation. However, the representation capability of binary labeling is limited by the hierarchy depth and thus suffers from handling 3D objects with multiple complex structures.
In fact, the geometric and topological information ex-isted in complex structure is the essential clue to under-stand the shapes of fine-grained objects. Topological Data
Analysis (TDA) [3] is an emerging field which infers rele-vant topological and geometric features from complex data.
TDA uses a mechanism called complex filtration to con-struct the multi-scale topological structures for the input point clouds, which extracts the high dimensional relation-ships existed in complex structures of point cloud, as illus-trated in Fig. 1(a). Then, persistent homology, a tool in
TDA, is applied on the resulting nested sequence of strictly increasing subcomplexes, which are called filtered com-plexes, to compute the multi-scale topological features, rep-resented as persistence barcodes and persistence diagram, as shown in Fig. 1(b) and (c). The 0-dim, 1-dim and 2-dim persistent homological features in the resulting persistence diagram correspond to the connected components, cycles and higher dimensional counterparts (e.g, cavities) in point cloud.
In this work, we opt for the TDA tools [10] to propose a novel network model called Persistent Homology based
Graph Convolution Network (PHGCN), which incorporates persistent homological features into GCN network to en-hance its capability to capture multi-scale topological fea-tures of complex structures in fine-grained 3D objects.
To further tackle the fine-grained segmentation problem, we found that the shape-dependent topological structures in fine-grained objects, especially the connected parts (e.g, handles, wires, knobs) are always exhibited as small-sized objects or thinly-connected components, which makes co-herent segmentation difficult since cross entropy loss gen-erally used in segmentation task may not sufficiently reflect the topological error even the overall loss value is low. To overcome such issue, we propose a Persistence Diagram
Loss (LP D), which works as topological constraint to en-sure the segmented output with sufficient topology correct-ness to obtain coherent segmentation output.
To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first work which introduces persistent homology to tackle fine-grained 3D semantic segmentation problem. The main contribu-tions of our work are summarized as follows: 1. With the persistent homological features, a novel GCN network model is able to capture multi-scale topolog-ical features of complex structures in fine-grained 3D objects. 2. A novel persistence diagram loss is applied to reinforce the topological correctness in prediction to provide co-herent fine-grained segmentation output. 3. The proposed work demonstrates the feasibility on the extension of generic GNN/GCN structure with compu-tational topological methods.
Extensive experiments on fine-grained semantic segmen-tation are evaluated on challenging 3D object-parts segmen-tation benchmarks, which demonstrate that the proposed
PHGCN model achieves state-of-the-arts results. 2. Preliminaries in Topological Data Analysis
Topological data analysis (TDA) [3] is an emerging field which goal is to capture the related topological and geomet-ric features from data of complex structure. In this section, a brief overview is provided to highlight the mechanism in
TDA. The details of TDA can be found in the seminal pa-pers [11, 33]. 2.1. Simplicial Complex
As there is no direct approach in extracting topolog-ical information from data points, simplicial complex is constructed as a topological approximation to the underly-ing shape of the sampled points. Simplicial complex can be regarded as a high dimensional extension of a graph, which contains collection of simplices of different dimen-sion. The geometrical realizations of k-dim simplices are vertices(k=0), edges(k=1), triangles(k=2), tetrahedra(k=3) and higher-order counterparts(k ⩾ 4), respectively. 2.2. Homology Group
To computationally analyze the topological features of simplicial complex, homology groups are assigned to sim-plicial complex. The homology group is a kind of math-ematical group which describes the topological features of simplicial complex in different dimension. The topologi-cal features of k-dim homology group refer to connected components (k=0), cycles (k=1), and cavities (k=2), respec-tively. 2.3. Persistent Homology and Filtration
Persistence is a kind of measurement on how a shape changes when a given parameter varies. Persistent homol-ogy provides a way for keeping track of when topological features appear and vanish during the variation of certain parameter, such as the scale of each data point. In this pe-riod, a nested sequence of simplical complexes, also known as filtration, is generated as shown in Fig. 1(a). The filtra-tion captures the evolution progress of simplical complex by increasing the scale parameter, which can be considered as the multi-scale topological spaces underlying the data points. Consequently, the lifetime of each multi-scale topo-logical feature is recorded as persistence barcode, as shown in Fig. 1(b). The persistence barcode can then be converted into the birth time and death time of each topological feature and is represented as persistence diagram, as illustrated in
Fig. 1(c). As a result, the multi-scale topological informa-tion of the shape underlined in the data points is captured. 3.