Abstract
The popularization of intelligent devices including smartphones and surveillance cameras results in more se-rious privacy issues. De-identiﬁcation is regarded as an effective tool for visual privacy protection with the process of concealing or replacing identity information. Most of the existing de-identiﬁcation methods suffer from some lim-itations since they mainly focus on the protection process and are usually non-reversible. In this paper, we propose a personalized and invertible de-identiﬁcation method based on the deep generative model, where the main idea is in-troducing a user-speciﬁc password and an adjustable pa-rameter to control the direction and degree of identity vari-ation. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and generalization of our proposed framework for both face de-identiﬁcation and recovery. 1.

Introduction
The widespread use of handheld devices such as smart-phones and digital cameras is conducive to image produc-tion, and the development of social media promotes wide dissemination and easy access to images along with the in-creasingly common applications of computer vision tech-nology and deep learning. The above factors lead to serious threats to image privacy and security.
Most importantly, face images are generally considered to contain abundant private information. The earliest tech-niques obfuscated privacy-sensitive information by pixel-level processing which have been proved vulnerable and poor effects on utility [23]. Recent GAN-based meth-ods like [10, 16] improve the quality and utility of de-identiﬁcation results remarkably. What’s more, the re-search on disentangled representations [5, 18] contributes to transforming the identity information without changing the other facial attributes, which makes it possible that the de-identiﬁed results keep visual similarity with the original.
Most de-identiﬁcation methods only focus on the protec-tion phase, which can help to protect identity in surveillance for normal situations or uploading images on social media.
Considering that when looking for the identity in criminal investigations or sharing pictures with close friends, it is hoped to use the original image instead of the de-identiﬁed.
Therefore, how to restore the original image is also a critical task. Moreover, notice that the tradeoff between privacy and utility poses a major challenge for all privacy-preserving methods, and different levels of privacy are required in dif-ferent scenarios. We believe that an ideal comprehensive de-identiﬁcation method should: a) avoid deteriorating non-sensitive information like facial expression, behavior and so on, b) control the degree of privacy protection according to application, c) be able to restore the original image under security conditions.
To achieve the above targets, this paper proposes a per-sonalized and invertible face de-identiﬁcation method. The main framework can be summarized in the following three stages: (1) extract disentangled identity and attributes and ensure the attributes unchanged during the de-identiﬁcation process, (2) calculate the protected or restored identity with the identity modiﬁcation module based on the password p and privacy level parameter d, (3) implement image recon-struction. As shown in Fig. 1, compared with existing de-identiﬁcation methods, our approach can retain more sim-ilarities with the original. Different from the generative adversarial network conditioned on passwords proposed by
Gu et al. [8], which needs to retrain the network for differ-ent passwords, our encryption process is relatively indepen-dent of the deep generative network, so that the password form can be deﬁned more ﬂexibly, the complexity will be reduced greatly and the scope of identity changes can be in-ﬁnitely expanded. Different from k-Same family algorithms
[6, 7, 17] which can provide privacy guarantees and control
(a) Original (b) Blur (c) Pixelation (d) Noise (e)DeepPrivacy (f)Gu et al. (g)Ours(d=0) (h)Ours(d=9)
Figure 1: De-identiﬁcation results compared with existing methods, where (b),(c),(d) are traditional methods and (e),(f) are based on deep learning. From left to right: the original image, Gaussian Blur (s=8), pixelation (8×8), Gaussian noise (σ=15),
DeepPrivacy [10], Gu et al. [8] and our de-identiﬁed results with the minimum and maximum privacy level d. privacy protection levels for the entire datasets, our method can control the extent of identity variation for each image.
In summary, our main contributions are as follows:
• A general framework that can transform identity of the input while ensuring the other attributes keep similar.
• Personalized de-identiﬁcation results can be generated with the user-speciﬁc password and the degree of iden-tity variation can be controlled.
• The original image can be restored if and only if the corresponding encryption parameters are provided.
• Experimental results show that compared with existing methods, our approach can generate de-identiﬁed re-sults with better performance of both privacy and util-ity, in addition to better-quality recovery results. 2.