Abstract
Accurate camera pose estimation or global camera re-localization is a core component in Structure-from-Motion (SfM) and SLAM systems. Given pair-wise relative cam-era poses, pose-graph optimization (PGO) involves solving for an optimized set of globally-consistent absolute camera poses. In this work, we propose a novel PGO scheme fu-eled by graph neural networks (GNN), namely PoGO-Net, to conduct the absolute camera pose regression leverag-ing multiple rotation averaging (MRA). Speciﬁcally, PoGO-Net takes a noisy view-graph as the input, where the nodes and edges are designed to encode the geometric constraints and local graph consistency. Besides, we address the out-lier edge removal by exploiting an implicit edge-dropping scheme where the noisy or corrupted edges are effectively
ﬁltered out with parameterized networks. Furthermore, we introduce a joint loss function embedding MRA formulation such that the robust inference is capable of achieving real-time performances even for large-scale scenes. Our pro-posed network is trained end-to-end on public benchmarks, outperforming state-of-the-art approaches in extensive ex-periments that demonstrate the efﬁciency and robustness of our proposed network. 1.

Introduction
Visual localization or camera pose regression lies in the heart of many computer vision and robotics tasks, with applications including robot navigation, autonomous driv-ing and augmented reality. Camera pose estimation is the process of self-determining the orientation and posi-tion with the aid of sequential information via image re-trieval. As the key component in standard camera pose estimation pipelines, pose-graph optimization (PGO) in-volves iterative estimations of pair-wise camera relative poses and the progressive optimization of the noisy global view-graph.
In most of the conventional Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [65, 69] and SLAM [47] systems, PGO is
*Work primarily conducted during graduate study at Temple Univ.
†Corresponding author. conducted as numerically solving a high-dimensional non-convex approximation problem by leveraging feature-frame correspondences and often yields high computational costs.
Despite the proliferation of research addressing the back-end optimization in SfM systems, many challenges remain open. Firstly, canonical solvers carry a complexity of cu-bic order with regards to the input size and gradually slows down [67], forfeiting the real-time requirements. Secondly, measurements of pair-wise relative camera poses are often noisy, yielding corrupted and erroneous edges in the view-graph and henceforth impairing the performances of both conventional and learning-based methods [52]. Thirdly, di-rect regressions of structures and motions with deep learn-ing networks are prone to overﬁtting [55, 62], hindering the robustness and generality in real-world applications.
Inspired by the recent successes of Graph Neural Net-works (GNNs) [53], we herein propose a novel GNN-based
PGO scheme to address all the aforementioned issues with a concrete network, namely, PoGO-Net. Speciﬁcally, we encode the edge messages with pair-wise geometric con-straints on the edges of the view-graph, aggregated with the local consistency information. The absolute camera orien-tations are encoded as node features, updated according to its connected edges and neighboring nodes. As we consider the input as a corrupted graph with erroneous and redun-dant edges, we address the graph de-noising issue by ex-ploiting topological parameterized network layers to con-duct the ‘edge dropping’, i.e., the outlier edges are removed according to the local graph consistency, resulting a sparser yet preciser sub-graph of the input view-graph. We re-deﬁne the message aggregation and design the loss func-tion based on multiple rotation averaging (MRA) algorithm, with the efﬁcient message passing scheme our proposed net-work is capable of processing in real-time speed even with large-scale datasets. Moreover, our network bares an end-to-end differentiable structure where the parameters of the de-noising layers and the GNN layers are jointly optimized during training.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel PGO formulation fueled with a
GNN to conduct the absolute camera pose regression by exploiting the MRA scheme.
• We design the de-noise layers to address the outlier edge removal in PGO. Our proposed de-noise layers are iteratively executed with the GNN layers, implic-itly exploiting the ‘edge-dropping’ scheme.
• We train PoGO-Net end-to-end and the network can be easily integrated with both conventional and learning-based SfM systems*. Extensive experiments on public benchmarks demonstrates the accuracy, efﬁciency and robustness of our proposed network. 2.