Abstract
Helmholtz stereopsis (HS) exploits the reciprocity prin-ciple of light propagation (i.e., the Helmholtz reciprocity) for 3D reconstruction of surfaces with arbitrary reflectance.
In this paper, we present the polarimetric Helmholtz stere-opsis (polar-HS), which extends the classical HS by con-sidering the polarization state of light in the reciprocal paths. With the additional phase information from polar-ization, polar-HS requires only one reciprocal image pair.
We formulate new reciprocity and diffuse/specular polari-metric constraints to recover surface depths and normals using an optimization framework. Using a hardware proto-type, we show that our approach produces high-quality 3D reconstruction for different types of surfaces, ranging from diffuse to highly specular. 1.

Introduction
Reconstructing 3D surfaces from 2D images is a long-standing ill-posed problem in computer vision. The com-plex surface reflectance properties of real-world objects make the problem highly challenging. All existing methods are limited to certain types of surface reflectance. For ex-ample, passive techniques examine the optical appearance of a surface under non-tightly focused illumination (e.g., a distant light source) and often assume photo-consistency or
Lambertian reflectance model for 3D reconstruction.
Helmholtz Stereopsis (HS) [55] is a 3D reconstruction technique that can recover surfaces with arbitrary and un-known reflectance. HS exploits the symmetry of surface reflectance; this is accomplished by using reciprocal im-age pairs (minimal three) that are captured with exchanged camera and light source positions. The reciprocity prop-erty guarantees that the relationship between the intensities at corresponding pixels depends only on the surface shape, and is independent of surface reflectance.
In this paper, we present a novel method we call polari-metric Helmholtz Stereopsis (polar-HS), which extends the classical HS by considering the polarization state of light in the reciprocal paths. We investigate the reciprocity relation-ship when the polarization states of incident and outgoing light are unrestricted (in which case the original Helmholtz reciprocity property cannot be directly applied). We de-rive a transpositional reciprocity relationship based on the
Stokes-Mueller formalism, and formulate a reciprocity con-straint for depth and normal estimation. We also exploit polarimetric cues under different types of reflections. We propose a new polarimetric image decomposition method that allows us to apply the polarimetric constraints under different circumstances. By combining the reciprocity and polarimetric constraints, our method can recover the sur-face depth and normal with only one reciprocity pair, which greatly simplifies the capture process. Unlike other one-pair HS methods [56, 48] that assume continuous paramet-ric depth functions, polar-HS works for discontinuous depth and does not require priors on surface geometry and mate-rial properties.
We validate our method with both synthetic and real ex-periments. We build a real polar-HS acquisition system with a rotating wheel to allow exchange of camera and light source positions. We perform experiments on objects with various shapes and reflectances, and on different composite scenes. Results show that our method is state-of-the-art.
Contributions. Our key contribution is the derivation of the transpositional reciprocity relationship when unre-stricted polarization states are being considered. The orig-inal Helmholtz reciprocity property has strong restrictions on the polarization states of the light beams in the recipro-cal paths, which is hard to satisfy in practice. The transpo-sitional reciprocity we derive allows the classical HS to be extended to the polarimetric case.
We propose a new image decomposition formulation that consists of three components: polarized-specular, polarized-diffuse, and unpolarized-diffuse. The decompo-sition provides a more accurate estimation of the angle of polarization for regularizing the surface normal, because it separates diffuse and specular (the angles of polariza-tion under these two cases have a 90◦ shift). Shape-from-polarization methods usually use the overall angle, and as-sume a dominant type of reflection. This decomposition also provides a specular map that allows us to apply the po-larimetric cues under different types of reflection.
Polar-HS reduces the minimal number of image pairs to
only one, without imposing any surface prior. Compared to other shape-from-polarization methods, polar-HS does not have the problem of angular ambiguity and does not require the refractive index of the surface to be known. 2.