Abstract
Future segmentation prediction aims to predict the seg-mentation masks for unobserved future frames. Most ex-isting works addressed it by directly predicting the inter-mediate features extracted by existing segmentation mod-els. However, these segmentation features are learned to be local discriminative (with rich details) and are always of high resolution/dimension. Hence, the complicated spatio-temporal variations of these features are difficult to predict, which motivates us to learn a more predictive representa-tion. In this work, we develop a novel framework called Pre-dictive Feature Autoencoder. In the proposed framework, we construct an autoencoder which serves as a bridge be-tween the segmentation features and the predictor. In the latent feature learned by the autoencoder, global structures are enhanced and local details are suppressed so that it is more predictive.
In order to reduce the risk of vanishing the suppressed details during recurrent feature prediction, we further introduce a reconstruction constraint in the pre-diction module. Extensive experiments show the effective-ness of the proposed approach and our method outperforms state-of-the-arts by a considerable margin. 1.

Introduction
Future segmentation prediction aims to predict the seg-mentation masks for unobserved future frames. It serves as a prerequisite for a broad set of applications with decision-making intelligent systems such as autonomous driving, vi-sual surveillance, and robot designing. For instance, self-driving cars can avoid hitting pedestrians if they can fore-cast possible collisions by predicting the masks of pedestri-ans in the future. Besides the benefits for potential applica-tions, future segmentation prediction is also closely related to learning better representation for future reasoning, which
*Equal contributions, † Corresponding author.
Figure 1. Previous methods addressed future segmentation predic-tion by predicting the segmentation featureswhich are of high res-olution/dimension and contains rich details. However, learning to predict the spatio-temporal variations of these features is difficult.
We propose to learn a predictive feature by developing an autoen-coder and perform prediction on the learned predictive feature. motivates us to study this problem in this work.
Previous work [22] found that directly predicting the segmentation features is much more effective than first pre-dict raw RGB values of future images and then segment. It is now the mainstream pipeline (Figure 1 (a)) in the commu-nity and most recent works [27, 5, 29, 30, 34, 13] focused on improving the prediction of these features. However, by revisiting the recent advances of segmentation methods, we discover a conflict between learning discriminative segmen-tation features and learning reliable future prediction.
The mainstream of learning a strong segmentation model is to learn discriminative feature representation for each pixel. Existing works [2, 38, 43, 10, 41] attempted to achieve this goal by learning resolution preserved represen-tations and aggregating context to enhance local discrimi-nation. The feature learned in this way is of high-resolution and contains rich local details. Although increasing the fea-ture resolution and local details can improve the segmen-tation performance, it also greatly increase the difficulty of learning accurate future prediction. As the resolution in-diction approaches; 2) we propose a simple yet effective autoencoder-based framework which learns predictive fea-tures for future segmentation prediction. Extensive experi-ments have been conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of each proposed component; 3) our proposed approach achieves new state-of-the-art results and outperforms other methods by a considerable margin on both future instance segmentation and future semantic segmentation prediction.
Figure 2. Influence of the feature resolution for segmentation and future segmentation prediction. 2.