Abstract
This paper focuses on the problem of 3D human recon-struction from 2D evidence. Although this is an inherently ambiguous problem, the majority of recent works avoid the uncertainty modeling and typically regress a single esti-In contrast to that, in this work, mate for a given input. we propose to embrace the reconstruction ambiguity and we recast the problem as learning a mapping from the in-put to a distribution of plausible 3D poses. Our approach is based on the normalizing ﬂows model and offers a se-ries of advantages. For conventional applications, where a single 3D estimate is required, our formulation allows for efﬁcient mode computation. Using the mode leads to performance that is comparable with the state of the art among deterministic unimodal regression models. Simul-taneously, since we have access to the likelihood of each sample, we demonstrate that our model is useful in a se-ries of downstream tasks, where we leverage the proba-bilistic nature of the prediction as a tool for more accu-rate estimation. These tasks include reconstruction from multiple uncalibrated views, as well as human model ﬁt-ting, where our model acts as a powerful image-based prior for mesh recovery. Our results validate the importance of probabilistic modeling, and indicate state-of-the-art per-formance across a variety of settings. Code and models are available at: https://www.seas.upenn.edu/
˜nkolot/projects/prohmr. 1.

Introduction
Reconstructing 3D human pose from any form of 2D observations (image, 2D keypoints, silhouettes) is a funda-mentally ambiguous problem. Of course, this is a very old insight, identiﬁed even from the very ﬁrst approaches [25] dealing with the problem of single-view human pose recon-struction. However, the current norm for the state-of-the-art approaches is to return a single 3D estimate which is typi-cally computed in a deterministic manner. In this work, we argue that there is great value at capturing a distribution of 3D poses conditioned on the preferred input.
Our reliance on systems that return a single deterministic
Figure 1: Probabilistic modeling for 3D human mesh re-covery. We propose to recast the problem of 3D human reconstruction as learning a mapping from the input to a distribution of 3D poses. The output distribution has high probability mass on a diverse set of poses that are consistent with the 2D evidence. 3D pose output often happens out of convenience; it makes comparison on conventional benchmarks straightforward and fair, while a single output is enough for many down-stream applications. Recent literature for 3D human pose reconstruction is currently dominated by such approaches and they are very popular for image [22] or keypoint [43] in-put, for skeleton-based [32] or mesh-based [23] reconstruc-tion, as well as regression [17] or optimization-based [4] approaches. On the other end of the spectrum, there have always been approaches that advocate in favor of gener-ating multiple predictions per input. Recent efforts have demonstrated interesting potential [3, 27], but often rely on ensemble-type prediction, modifying current systems into combining N output heads instead of one. This can lead to cumbersome architectural choices, inability to scale and/or limited expressivity for the output distribution.
Our approach aims to bridge this gap and demonstrate the value of predicting a distribution of 3D poses condi-tioned on the provided 2D input. To achieve this, we pro-pose an elegant and efﬁcient approach with many desirable properties missing from recent work, and we demonstrate its effectiveness. Instead of regressing a single estimate for the provided input, we use Normalizing Flows to regress a distribution of plausible poses. This allows us to train a network which returns a conditional distribution of 3D poses as a function of the input (e.g., image or 2D key-points), as depicted in Figure 1. Our probabilistic model 1
Figure 2: The value of probabilistic modeling for 3D human mesh estimation. We demonstrate that probabilistic modeling in the case of 3D human mesh estimation can be particularly useful because of its elegant and ﬂexible form, which enables a series of downstream applications. First row: In the typical case of 3D mesh regression, we can naturally use the mode of the distribution and perform on par with approaches regressing a single 3D mesh. Second row: When keypoints (or other types of 2D evidence) are available we can treat our model as an image-based prior and ﬁt a human body model to the keypoints by combining it with a 2D reprojection term. Third row: When multiple views are available, we can naturally consolidate all single-frame predictions by adding a cross-view consistency term. We underline that all these applications refer to test-time behavior and they use the same trained probabilistic model (no per-task training required). allows for fast sampling of diverse outputs, we can efﬁ-ciently compute the likelihood of each sample, and there is a fast and closed form solution to compute the mode of the distribution. The importance of the above is manifested in a variety of ways, which are summarized in Figure 2.
First, we can easily compute the mode of the distribution, which returns the most likely 3D pose for the particular in-put. This is convenient, when a single estimate is required for some applications. Interestingly, this regressed value is on par with the state-of-the-art deterministic methods, so our model can be valuable even in the more conventional settings. More importantly though, by treating our trained probabilistic model as a conditional distribution, we can use it in many downstream applications to combine information from different sources. For example, when 2D keypoints are available, optimization approaches [4, 38], are used to
ﬁt parametric human body models to these 2D locations.
In this case, our model can act as a powerful image-based prior that can guide the optimization towards accurate solu-tions that satisfy both 2D keypoint reprojection and image evidence. Similarly, when multiple views are available, we can consolidate information from all conditional distribu-tions, by optimizing for cross-view consistency and recover a 3D result that is consistent with the available observations.
Last but not least, we highlight that all these applications are available at test-time with the same trained probabilistic model, without any need for task-speciﬁc retraining.
We conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate the importance of our learned probabilistic model. We focus primarily on image-based mesh recovery [17], proposing the ProHMR model, but we also investigate 2D keypoint input [32]. We achieve particularly strong performance across different tasks and evaluation settings. Our contri-butions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose a probabilistic model for human mesh re-covery and demonstrate its value in various tasks.
• In the conventional evaluations with single estimate methods, our model is on par with the state of the art.
• We demonstrate that in the presence of additional in-formation sources, e.g., multiple views or 2D key-points, our model offers an elegant and effective way to consolidate said sources.
• In the setting of human body model ﬁtting, our model acts as a powerful image-based prior, achieving signif-icant boost over previous baselines. 2.