Abstract
High-quality point clouds have practical signiﬁcance for point-based rendering, semantic understanding, and sur-face reconstruction. Upsampling sparse, noisy and non-uniform point clouds for a denser and more regular ap-proximation of target objects is a desirable but challeng-ing task. Most existing methods duplicate point features for upsampling, constraining the upsampling scales at a ﬁxed rate. In this work, the arbitrary point clouds upsampling rates are achieved via edge-vector based afﬁne combina-tions, and a novel design of Edge-Vector based Approxima-tion for Flexible-scale Point clouds Upsampling (PU-EVA) is proposed. The edge-vector based approximation encodes neighboring connectivity via afﬁne combinations based on edge vectors, and restricts the approximation error within a second-order term of Taylor’s Expansion. Moreover, the
EVA upsampling decouples the upsampling scales with net-work architecture, achieving the arbitrary upsampling rates in one-time training. Qualitative and quantitative evalua-tions demonstrate that the proposed PU-EVA outperforms the state-of-the-arts in terms of proximity-to-surface, distri-bution uniformity, and geometric details preservation. 1.

Introduction
With increasing capability of acquiring point clouds as a direct approximation of an object or scene surface from 3D scanning sensors, typical applications processing raw points are prevailing, such as point-based semantic under-standing [3, 9, 24, 25, 27], point clouds rendering [4, 13] and surface reconstruction [19, 29], etc. Hence, the qual-ity of input points is critical for the digital designs. How-ever, a couple of varying artifacts, including occlusion, light
∗Equal contributions as co-ﬁrst author
†Corresponding author
Figure 1. Point cloud upsampling results of an elephant by us-ing (a) PU-Net [34], (b) 3PU [32], (c) PU-GAN [16] and (d) our
PU-EVA. Note that our PU-EVA with edge-vector based approx-imation generates points more uniform with ﬁne-grained details, compared to other state-of-the-arts. reﬂection, surface materials, sensor resolutions and view-ing angles, hinder high-quality practical acquisition of point clouds. It is desirable to upsample raw point clouds for a better description of an underlying surface, by converting the sparse, noisy, and non-uniform points into the dense, regular and uniform ones.
Intuitively, as a similar task in 2D computer vision, im-age super-resolution [15, 18, 23, 26, 31] is supposedly to lend well-developed techniques for point clouds upsam-pling. Nevertheless, the intrinsic irregularity of point clouds makes effective implementations for image interpolations not applicable in 3D world. Based on this, different crite-ria should also be considered for point clouds upsampling.
First, the upsampled points should lie on or be close to the underlying surfaces of target objects. Next, the upsampled results should distribute uniformly, instead of being clus-tered together. Last, the generated points should preserve geometric details of the target objects.
The previous works often upsample points by simply du-plicating point features and disentangling them in place via a set of MLPs [16, 32, 34]. The strategy may lead the gen-erated points cluster around original ones and loss geomet-ric details of the target objects. To overcome the issues, we are motivated to develop an upsampling strategy by for-mulating it as a problem of surface approximation based on edge-vector afﬁne combinations. According to linear approximation theorem, the new points are upsampled in each small local neighborhood of the underlying surfaces.
Here, edges as a concept inspired by EdgeConv [28], con-nect each center point to its neighboring points within the local neighborhood. The edge vectors encode feature of the oriented edges pointing from center points. The afﬁne combinations interpolate new points based on the edge vec-tors via coefﬁcients determined by a similarity matrix. Dif-ferent from straightforward feature duplications for point upsampling, the edge-vector based approximation interpo-lates new points with endowing neighboring geometric in-formation, and restricts the approximation error within a second-order term. To implement the motivation, we pro-pose a novel design of Edge-Vector based Approximation for Flexible-scale Point clouds Upsampling (PU-EVA). The proposed PU-EVA decouples the upsampling scales with network architecture, making the upsampling rate ﬂexible in one-time end-to-end training. To sum up, the contribu-tions of proposed PU-EVA is listed as below. 1. The proposed PU-EVA achieves arbitrary upsampling scales via edge-vectors based afﬁne combinations, making the upsampling rate decouple with network ar-chitectures; 2. The edge-vector based afﬁne combinations upsample new points by endowing geometric information of the target objects, which beneﬁts upsampling performance in sharp regions and areas with ﬁne-grained details; 3. The proposed upsampling unit restricts the approxi-mation error in a second-order term within each lo-cal neighborhood in light of linear approximation the-orem. 2.