Abstract
Multi-scale and multi-patch deep models have been shown effective in removing blurs of dynamic scenes. How-ever, these methods still suffer from one major obstacle: manually designing a lightweight and high-efﬁciency net-work is challenging and time-consuming. To tackle this obstacle, we propose a novel deblurring method, dubbed
PyNAS (pyramid neural architecture search network), to-wards automatically designing hyper-parameters includ-ing the scales, patches, and standard cell operators. The proposed PyNAS adopts gradient-based search strategies and innovatively searches the hierarchy patch and scale scheme not limited to cell searching. Speciﬁcally, we in-troduce a hierarchical search strategy tailored to the multi-scale and multi-patch deblurring task. The strategy follows the principle that the ﬁrst distinguishes between the top-level (pyramid-scales and pyramid-patches) and bottom-level variables (cell operators) and then searches multi-scale variables using the top-to-bottom principle. During the search stage, PyNAS employs an early stopping strat-egy to avoid the collapse and computational issues. Fur-thermore, we use a path-level binarization mechanism for multi-scale cell searching to save the memory consumption.
Our primary contribution is a real-time deblurring algo-rithm (around 58 fps) for 720p images while achieves state-of-the-art deblurring performance on the GoPro and Video
Deblurring datasets. 1.

Introduction
Blind motion deblurring is an ill-posed problem aim-ing to rehabilitate the sharp image from a degraded image caused by depth variation, camera shakes, and object mo-tions [21, 26, 35]. In the past decades, image deblurring has attracted massive attention from the computer vision com-munity, especially in applications of surveillance, remote sensing, and cameras. Traditional deblurring approaches remove the undesirable blur via the blur kernel estimation
*Corresponding author
Figure 1. PSNR vs. test runtime of state-of-the-art deep motion deblurring methods and the proposed PyNAS on the GoPro dataset
[21]. The pink zone indicates that the inference time of a 720p image is less than 33ms (i.e., 30fps). The architecture found by our PyNAS achieves better performance and less inference time (17 ms) than other handcrafted or NAS-based networks.
[7, 25], which approximates the hidden degradation knowl-edge. However, obtaining a satisfactory blur kernel ramains as an open problem.
Deep learning-based models [31, 35, 8] have veriﬁed the superiority in learning the regression between blurry in-puts and the corresponding sharp images. Especially, the
‘coarse-to-ﬁne’ scheme has been applied to deblurring sce-narios via a multi-scale architecture to exploit the deblur-ring priors at different levels. However, there still exist some challenges: i) expensive runtime caused by the large number of training parameters due to large ﬁlter size; ii) structure redundancy attributed to the ineffectual increas-ing depth for very low-resolution or small patch input in a multi-scale model [21].
Recently, a growing interest is witnessed in developing algorithms to automatically design deep learning architec-tures instead of the manual process. Architectures found by the searching algorithms have achieved highly competi-tive performance especially on high-level tasks such as im-age classiﬁcation [16], object detection [37, 6] and seman-tic segmentation [41, 17]. Inspired by this, we aim to ﬁg-ure out an effective algorithm to tackle the above deblurring challenges. Speciﬁcally, we design a searching algorithm to automatically optimize the lightweight pyramid structure hyper-parameters, including the scale-pyramid and patch-pyramid. Our main contributions are summarized as:
• We propose a lightweight multi-scale pyramid neu-ral architecture search approach for image deblurring, termed PyNAS. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst at-tempt to design a multi-scale architecture search algo-rithm to handle dynamic scene deblurring tasks.
• The proposed PyNAS innovatively includes the pyramid structure (scale-pyramid and patch-pyramid schemes) into the search space to tackle the challenge of non-uniform motion blurs in dynamic scenes.
• We deﬁne the hierarchical relationship among opti-mization variables as the top-level (patch and scale scheme) and bottom level (basic operators), and we train the model with a top-to-bottom approach.
We apply our algorithms on the GoPro and VideoDe-blurring datasets for evaluation. We qualitatively and quan-titatively evaluate the proposed algorithm on the real-time video deblurring task. Shown in Figure 1, the proposed net-work achieves better performance compared to SOTA meth-ods using less inference time. 1.1.