Abstract 1.

Introduction
Finding shape correspondences can be formulated as an N P-hard quadratic assignment problem (QAP) that be-comes infeasible for shapes with high sampling density. A promising research direction is to tackle such quadratic op-timization problems over binary variables with quantum an-nealing, which allows for some problems a more efficient search in the solution space. Unfortunately, enforcing the linear equality constraints in QAPs via a penalty signif-icantly limits the success probability of such methods on currently available quantum hardware. To address this lim-itation, this paper proposes Q-Match, i.e., a new iterative quantum method for QAPs inspired by the α-expansion al-gorithm, which allows solving problems of an order of mag-nitude larger than current quantum methods. It implicitly enforces the QAP constraints by updating the current esti-mates in a cyclic fashion. Further, Q-Match can be applied iteratively, on a subset of well-chosen correspondences, al-lowing us to scale to real-world problems. Using the latest quantum annealer, the D-Wave Advantage, we evaluate the proposed method on a subset of QAPLIB as well as on iso-metric shape matching problems from the FAUST dataset.
Shape correspondence is at the heart of many computer vision and graphics applications, as knowing the relation-ship between points allows transferring information to new shapes. While this problem has been around for a long time
[41], the setting with non-rigidly deformed shapes is still challenging [20]. One reason is that generic matching of n points in two shapes can be formulated as an N P-hard
Quadratic Assignment Problem (QAP) min
X∈Pn
E(X) := xTW x, (1) where x = vec(X) is the n2-dimensional vector cor-responding to a matrix in the set of permutations P ⊂
{0, 1}n×n and W ∈ Rn2×n2 is an energy matrix describing how well certain pairwise properties are preserved between pairs of matches. For some choices of W and assumptions on the input shapes, (1) can become feasible by adding prior knowledge and exploiting geometric structures. For exam-ple, rigid shapes can be aligned through rotation and trans-lation only — a problem with only six degrees of freedom.
For general cases, QAPs remain challenging nonetheless.
In this work, we propose a new method for shape match-ing that employs quantum annealing, finds high quality so-lutions of QAPs with high probability, and is suitable for real-world problems. In recent years, quantum computers have made significant progress and machines such as the
IBM Q System One (circuit model) and D-Wave Advantage
System 1.1 (adiabatic, quantum annealer) became available for research purposes. The circuit-based and adiabatic mod-els are polynomially equivalent to each other in theory [1].
However, the current implementations differ substantially and have different challenges to overcome. One advantage of adiabatic quantum computing is that it is less sensitive to noise and decoherence [16].
Unfortunately, adiabatic quantum computers (AQCer) can a-priori only solve unconstrained problems and thus cannot directly solve QAPs (1) which are constrained to permutation matrices. To overcome this limitation, a recent method [62] adds a penalty term enforcing the solution to be a permutation. However, this reduces the solvable problem sizes to very small n ≤ 4 and, in practice, the probabil-ity of finding the globally optimal solution drops to random
In contrast, we propose a new formulation for guessing.
AQCing that is guaranteed to result in permutation matri-ces in problem sizes in the order of magnitude of available (fully connected) qubits. See Fig. 1 for the method overview and Table 1 for a list of acronyms we use. Our method is iterative, and we solve a series of quadratic unconstrained binary optimization (QUBO) problems on D-Wave which were prepared on a classical CPU. In summary, the contri-butions of this paper are as follows:
• Q-Match, i.e., a new scalable quantum approach for searching correspondences between two shapes related by a non-rigid transformation (isometry or near-isometry).
• An iterative problem formulation through a variant of α-expansion which avoids explicit linear constraints for per-mutations and can be applied to large problem instances.
We evaluate our method on a real AQCer, D-Wave Ad-vantage system 1.1, and obtain improved results compared to the previous quantum method [62]. Moreover, Q-Match performs on par with the classical matching approach [52].
This paper does not assume prior knowledge of quantum computing from readers. Secs. 3.1 and 3.2 review prelimi-naries required to understand, implement and apply the pro-posed Q-Match approach. The source code is available at https://4dqv.mpi-inf.mpg.de/QMATCH/. 2.