Abstract
Satellite multi-view stereo (MVS) imagery is particularly suited for large-scale Earth surface reconstruction. Differ-ing from the perspective camera model (pin-hole model) that is commonly used for close-range and aerial cam-eras, the cubic rational polynomial camera (RPC) model is the mainstream model for push-broom linear-array satel-lite cameras. However, the homography warping used in the prevailing learning based MVS methods is only appli-cable to pin-hole cameras.
In order to apply the SOTA learning based MVS technology to the satellite MVS task for large-scale Earth surface reconstruction, RPC warping should be considered. In this work, we propose, for the first time, a rigorous RPC warping module. The rational poly-nomial coefficients are recorded as a tensor, and the RPC warping is formulated as a series of tensor transformations.
Based on the RPC warping, we propose the deep learning based satellite MVS (SatMVS) framework for large-scale and wide depth range Earth surface reconstruction. We also introduce a large-scale satellite image dataset con-sisting of 519 5120×5120 images, which we call the TLC
SatMVS dataset. The satellite images were acquired from a three-line camera (TLC) that catches triple-view images simultaneously, forming a valuable supplement to the exist-ing open-source WorldView-3 datasets with single-scanline images. Experiments show that the proposed RPC warp-ing module and the SatMVS framework can achieve a supe-rior reconstruction accuracy compared to the pin-hole fit-ting method and conventional MVS methods. Code and data are available at https://github.com/WHU-GPCV/SatMVS. 1.

Introduction
Three-dimensional scene reconstruction from multi-view optical images is a hot topic in both the com-puter vision and remote sensing fields. Currently, there (3D)
*Equally contributed.
†Corresponding author. are two mainstream camera models: the perspective camera model (i.e., the pin-hole model) and the cubic rational poly-nomial camera (RPC) model. The prevailing deep learning based multi-view stereo (MVS) methods [4, 5, 10, 20, 21, 31, 32, 33] have been designed and developed for multi-view images captured from pin-hole cameras. To date, the deep learning based MVS task for RPC-based images, i.e., optical satellite images, has not been tackled.
The study of satellite MVS task is very important as the multi-view satellite images captured from push-broom linear-array cameras with the RPC model are the main data source for large-scale 3D Earth surface reconstruction. In the recent deep learning based MVS methods [32, 5, 10], homography warping has been utilized to align images from different viewpoints to a reference view through a set of hypothetical fronto-parallel depth planes of the reference camera [32]. Analogously, developing a specific warping method for aligning multi-view satellite images to the ref-erence image space could extend the deep learning based
MVS methods to satellite images. The primary contribu-tion of this work is that we propose, for the first time, a rigorous RPC warping module. Based on the RPC warping module, we then propose the SatMVS framework for deep learning based satellite MVS task. The SatMVS framework utilizes RPC warping to align the multi-view satellite im-ages through the hypothetical height planes in the world co-ordinate system instead of the front-parallel depth planes. It features a multi-stage coarse-to-fine matching strategy on a feature pyramid to tolerate the wide search range, consid-ering the great topographic relief of the Earth’s surface and high-capacity satellite images. The SatMVS framework can also be used with most of the modern deep learning based
MVS methods by replacing the perspective model with the
RPC model and introducing the multi-stage strategy.
The other contribution is that we introduce a new open-source satellite MVS dataset (the TLC SatMVS dataset).
We believe that this is the first open-source satellite dataset to be built from images collected by the push-broom three-line camera (TLC). The camera is mounted on the Ziyuan-3 (ZY-3) satellite. This dataset will be a beneficial com-plement to the existing single linear-array WorldView-3 datasets such as MVS3D [3] and US3D [2]. The difference between a TLC and a single-scanline camera is that the for-mer captures three images at the same scene simultaneously, and the latter has to shoot from different orbit positions at different times to form a stereo picture of the same scene.
In summary, we fill two gaps in this paper: 1) the lack of RPC warping module, which has hindered the applica-tion of the state-of-the-art MVS method to satellite images; and 2) the lack of large open-source TLC satellite MVS datasets, which has hampered the development of satellite
MVS and large-scale Earth surface reconstruction. 2.