Abstract
When many forgery images become more and more re-alistic with help of image editing tools and convolutional neural networks (CNNs), authenticators need to improve their ability to verify these forgery images. The process of generating and detecting forgery images is the same as the principle of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs).
In this paper, since the retouching progress of forgery im-ages requires to suppress the tampering artifacts and to keep the structural information, we consider this retouch-ing progress as an image style transform, and then propose a fake-to-realistic transform generator GT . For detecting the tampered regions, a localization generator GM is pro-posed too, which is based on a multi-decoder-single-task strategy. By adversarial training two generators, the pro-posed α-learnable whitening and coloring transform (α-learnable WCT) block in GT automatically suppress the tampering artifacts in the forgery images. Meanwhile, the detection and localization abilities of GM will be improved by learning the forgery images retouched by GT . The ex-periment results demonstrate that the proposed two gener-ators in GAN can simulate confrontation between the faker and the authenticator well; the localization generator GM outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in splicing forgery detection and localization on four public datasets. 1.

Introduction
Cyberspace has experienced explosive growth, and countless images are uploaded to the Internet every day, which includes a lot of forgery images. Since forgery im-ages can be easily produced by user-friendly image editing tools and used to create fake news and rumors, it is neces-sary to develop more effective methods for image forgery detection and localization. For the image forgeries, copy-move and removal forgery require a single source image,
∗ Corresponding Author but splicing forgery copies and pastes regions from one or more source images onto the target image. Fig. 1-(a) demonstrates the two examples of splicing forgery im-ages. In this paper, our work focuses on detecting the splic-ing forgery images and then locate the tampered regions of these detected images.
The image splicing forgery detection methods can be summarized into two main categories, methods based on conventional features extraction[19, 6, 14, 21] and meth-ods based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs)[26, 28, 9, 1, 25, 24, 2, 13]. Most conventional methods focus on a particular image ﬁngerprint that is caused by imag-ing processing and post-processing. Because the partic-ular image ﬁngerprint is easy to be inﬂuenced by post-processing, such as JPEG compression, down-sampling, and mean ﬁltering, many conventional methods are easy to fail. Fig. 1-(c) shows the experiments results of a conven-tional method[19].
CNN-based methods can be further divided into patch-based nethods and end-to-end methods. For patch-based methods, since the ﬁnal detection result is derived from the decisions of image patches, the detected results are generally composed of square white blocks, or only the patches on boundaries of the tampered regions are detected.
For end-to-end methods, if the tampering artifacts are sup-pressed and reduced by the faker, it is difﬁcult for end-to-end methods to detect tampered regions. Fig. 1-(d) shows the experimental results of a CNN-based method[1].
To solve these problems, V. Kniaz et al.[13] introduced a
GAN-based method named Mixed Adversarial Generators (MAG) for image splicing forgery detection and localiza-tion. However, MAG requires class segmentations to re-touch splicing forgery images, which consumes a host of computational resources. Furthermore, since the prediction of both tampered region and class segmentation is generated in a single decoder network, some untampered semantic re-gions, who are similar to the tampered regions in the ground truth, will be easily detected as the tampered regions, as the experiment results demonstrated in Fig. 1-(e)
Figure 1. Two examples of splicing forgery images and corresponding localization results of four types of detection methods. (a) The splicing forgery images. (b) Ground truths of tampered regions. (c) The detection result of a conventional detection method ADQ[19]. (d)
The detection result of a CNN-based detection method LSTM[1]. (e) The detection result of a GANs-based detection method MAG[13]. (f) The detection result of the proposed RTAG.
In this work, we rethink the principle of generating and detecting forgery images. When image fakers retouch the forgery images more realistic, they need to hide the tam-pering artifacts, while keeping the structural information of the forgery image unchanged. The retouching progress of forgery images is the same as the task of image style trans-form. Thus, we consider the retouching process of forgery image as the image style transform, which transforms splic-ing forgery images from a ‘fake style’ to a ‘real style’.
Based on this insight, we propose the fake-to-realistic trans-form generator GT to simulate the faker. In contrast, the authenticators need to detect the tampered regions from these more ‘real style’ splicing forgery images, so a lo-calization generator GM with the multi-decoder-single-task (MDST) strategy is proposed. In the adversarial training be-tween GT and GM , for progressively suppressing the tam-pering artifacts of the splicing forgery image, we propose
α-learnable whitening and coloring transform blocks (α0.-learnable WCT) based on WCT[16] in GT . While, through the multi-decoder-single-task strategy (MDST), GM will improve its detection and localization ability by learning fewer tampering artifacts from the retouched images. More-over, the discriminators DT and DM will qualify the out-puts of GT and GM . The GAN framework for adversarial training GM and GT is named Reality Transform Adver-sarial Generators (RTAG), the two examples of detection results are presented in Fig. 1-(f).
The main contribution of this work can be summarized as follows: (1) The retouching progress of forgery images is considered as the image style transform in this paper. Based on this insight, a fake-to-realistic transform generator GT is proposed, which applies the α-learnable WCT blocks to automatically progressively retouch the splicing forgery im-ages more realistic; (2) For detecting the tampered regions by fewer tampering artifacts, a localization generator GM is proposed according to the multi-decoder-single-task strat-egy; (3) By adversarial training GT and GM in the GAN framework, the localization generator GM will detect and locate the tampered regions even the splicing forgery im-ages has fewer tampering artifacts. 2.