Abstract
In our algorithm,
We propose a novel approach that integrates under-parameterized RANSAC (UPRANSAC) with Hough Trans-form to detect vanishing points (VPs) from un-calibrated monocular images. the UPRANSAC chooses one hypothetical inlier in a sample set to ﬁnd a portion of the VP’s degrees of freedom, which is followed by a highly reliable brute-force voting scheme (1-D Hough
Transform) to ﬁnd the VP’s remaining degrees of freedom along the extension line of the hypothetical inlier. Our ap-proach is able to sequentially ﬁnd a series of VPs by re-peatedly removing inliers of any detected VPs from minimal sample sets until the stop criterion is reached. Compared to traditional RANSAC that selects 2 edges as a hypotheti-cal inlier pair to ﬁt a model of VP hypothesis and requires hitting a pair of inliners, the UPRANSAC has a higher like-lihood to hit one inliner and is more reliable in VP de-tection. Meanwhile, the tremendously scaled-down voting space with the requirement of only 1 parameter for pro-cessing signiﬁcantly increased the performance efﬁciency of Hough Transform in our scheme. Testing results with well-known benchmark datasets show that the detection ac-curacies of our approach were higher or on par with the
SOTA while running in deeply real-time zone. 1.

Introduction
A set of parallel lines in 3-D space converge in image plane to a common point called vanishing point (VP) which is equivalent to the inﬁnity of the set of parallel lines in the original world frame. VP contains important informa-tion for perspective projection transformation. The coordi-nates of a VP fully determine the direction in 3-D space of the set of parallel lines that converge to the VP. Moreover,
VPs formed by multiple sets of co-plane parallel lines are collinear. The line that passes these VPs is called a vanish-ing line, which solely determines the plane containing the very sets of parallel lines. A triplet of mutually orthogonal
VPs can be used to derive the internal as well as external parameters of the camera [6]. A special and also important type of vanishing line is the horizon line, a virtual line pass-ing a set of horizontal vanishing points. In man-made en-vironment, a type of vanishing point called zenith (or nadir when the position is below the image center) is formed by lines perpendicular to horizontal plane in the real world .
VP detection is of relevance in camera calibration ( [6], [7], [18], and [1]), 3-D reconstruction ( [25], [37]), virtual reality [30], robot navigation [15] and scene tracking
[8] and vehicle automatic driving [16]. Consequently, VP detection is an important research topic in computer vision.
The location of a VP in the image plane is determined by relative positions and directions of a set of parallel lines dis-played in the camera frame. The process of detecting a VP is essentially to search in the image plane for the common intersection of a set of VP’s inlier edges (line segments) that are projections of the set of parallel line segments in the original 3-D space. Due to background noise and im-age distortion, inlier edges of a valid VP generally do not exactly converge to a single point and instead they intersect with each other in a bounded region, whose centroid is re-garded as a VP nonetheless. 1.1.