Abstract
Heatmap-based detection methods are dominant for 2D human pose estimation even though regression is more intuitive. The introduction of the integral regression method, which, architecture-wise uses an implicit heatmap, brings the two approaches even closer together.
This begs the question – does detection really outperform regression? In this paper, we investigate the difference in supervision between the heatmap-based detection and integral regression, as this is the key remaining difference between the two approaches. In the process, we discover an underlying bias behind integral pose regression that arises from taking the expectation after the softmax function. To counter the bias, we present a compensation method which we find to improve integral regression accuracy on all 2D pose estimation benchmarks. We further propose a simple combined detection and bias-compensated regression method that considerably outperforms state-of-the-art baselines with few added components. 1.

Introduction
Pose estimation aims to determine the spatial position of articulated joints such as the human body or hand.
At first glance, it seems that the problem should be a straight-forward regression. However, methods which di-rectly regress joint coordinates [4, 29, 25] are less effective than those which locate the joints by estimating a likelihood heatmap [24, 8, 36, 28]. The rationale is that working with heatmaps allows the architecture to remain fully convolu-tional, thereby retaining spatial structures throughout the encoding and decoding process.
As labels, heatmap methods use a Gaussian centered at the ground truth joint coordinate. This formulation converts pose estimation into a detection problem; the network is tasked with predicting, at each pixel, the probability of that pixel being a joint pixel. The standard approach is to then use an argmax function to decode the output heatmap into
Figure 1. An illustration of the integral regression bias, with the implicit heatmap overlaid with the resulting predicted joint loca-tion as indicated by the white square. The bias, i.e. difference between the heatmap mode and predicted location, increases as the mode is further from the center and the value of β decreases.
There is no bias only when the heatmap mode is centered. This paper proposes a method to compensate for the bias by partition-ing the heatmap into individual regions (Ω1 to Ω4, see upper left heatmap) to ensure that the heatmap mode is centered. a joint coordinate. The argmax function has two key draw-backs: it is not differentiable and it fixes the resolution of the estimated coordinate to that of the heatmap itself. De-spite these disadvantages, however, detection-based meth-ods1 are highly effective and achieve state-of-the-art results for human pose estimation [24, 8, 36, 28].
An alternative form of decoding is to take a softmax to-gether with an expectation [14, 29, 25, 21]. Both the soft-1The naming convention used in the literature can be confusing in the context of this discussion as detection-based methods are often referred to as indirect regression or heatmap regression [2, 14, 40].
max and the expectation functions are differentiable. As such, one can train end-to-end directly from ground truth joint coordinates while retaining the benefits of fully con-volutional architectures. This approach is referred to as la-tent heatmap regression [14] in the hand pose estimation literature and integral pose estimation [29] in body pose es-timation literature.
Sun et al. [29]’s comparison between integral pose re-gression versus detection-based heatmaps concluded that integral regression is either as competitive or better for 2D pose estimation. However, the results may not be fully conclusive, as [29] used a unique backbone for integral re-gression when comparing against existing detection-based methods. Given that detection-based methods still domi-nate state-of-the-art, this begs a revisiting of the question.
Which is better for 2D pose estimation - heatmap based de-tection or integral regression?
A critical difference when comparing the two methods is that integral regression method is slower to converge than heatmap-based detection.
[29, 40] have put forth that the explicit heatmap label in detection provides a denser form of supervision than the joint coordinates of integral regres-sion. We show, as a main contribution of this paper, that the slow convergence may also be the result of an induced bias in integral regression. Specifically, the combination of the softmax with an expectation shifts the heatmap’s alignment with respect to the true coordinate position. This in turn limits the ability of the neural network to learn efficiently.
By compensating for the bias, we improve both the learning and performance of the integral regression method.
In our performance comparisons, we are inspired by [27] to dig deeper into the factors of variation present in cur-rent benchmarks. To that end, we go beyond the current standard of reporting of a single (average) value of AP and
PCK to separate different factors. Surprisingly, we find that in the “hard” cases of pose estimation, i.e., smaller size, fewer joints, or more occlusion, integral regression outper-forms heatmap based detection. However, these effects are obscured because the hard cases constitute the dataset tail. to retain the benefits of both detection-based heatmaps and integral regression, we pro-pose a combined learning framework. Specifically, we in-corporate our bias compensation into the end-to-end learn-ing of integral regression, while leveraging the detection-based loss in initial training epochs to leverage the dense supervision. Summarizing our contributions, in an effort
Finally,
• We show via derivation a previously unobserved bias in integral pose regression based on the combination of the softmax and expectation operations.
• We propose a simple compensation scheme to counter this bias which can up training and improve the perfor-mance of integral regression methods.
• We analyze the performance differences of detection-and regression-based human pose estimation methods for different factors of variation. Regression method performs better in “hard” cases of fewer joints, more occlusion and lower-resolution inputs.
• We propose a bias-compensated joint framework for detection and regression that retains the benefits of both fast convergence and high performance in hard cases. Our new framework achieves state-of-the-art re-sults on MS COCO and MPII for 2D human pose esti-mation and RHD for 2D & 3D hand pose estimation. 2.