Abstract
We present RePOSE, a fast iterative refinement method for 6D object pose estimation. Prior methods perform re-finement by feeding zoomed-in input and rendered RGB images into a CNN and directly regressing an update of a refined pose. Their runtime is slow due to the com-putational cost of CNN, which is especially prominent in multiple-object pose refinement. To overcome this problem,
RePOSE leverages image rendering for fast feature extrac-tion using a 3D model with a learnable texture. We call this deep texture rendering, which uses a shallow multi-layer perceptron to directly regress a view-invariant image representation of an object. Furthermore, we utilize differ-entiable Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) optimization to refine a pose fast and accurately by minimizing the distance be-tween the input and rendered image representations with-out the need of zooming in. These image representations are trained such that differentiable LM optimization con-verges within few iterations. Consequently, RePOSE runs at 92 FPS and achieves state-of-the-art accuracy of 51.6% on the Occlusion LineMOD dataset - a 4.1% absolute im-provement over the prior art, and comparable result on the
YCB-Video dataset with a much faster runtime. The code is available at https://github.com/sh8/repose. 1.

Introduction
In many applications of 6D object pose estimation like robotic grasping and augmented reality (AR), fast runtime is critical. State-of-the-art 6D object pose estimation meth-ods [19, 40, 28] demonstrate that iterative 6D object pose re-finement improves the accuracy largely. Nevertheless, since recent 6D object pose refinement methods [21, 19] directly regress an update of a pose to align a zoomed-in input image of an object against a template image (e.g., 3D rendering of that object) using a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), we presume that the CNN’s computational cost of zoomed-in inputs can be a bottleneck toward the real-time 6D object pose estimation.
We have mainly two choices of refinement strategies. As described, the former one is CNN-based direct regression,
Figure 1: RePOSE Framework: (a) 3D model with deep texture is projected to obtain (b) the rendered image rep-resentation with the deep texture renderer. (c) The pose is refined iteratively by minimizing the projection error of the rendered image representation and (e) the CNN feature ex-tracted from (d) the input image via Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) optimization. which generally requires large computational cost. The lat-ter one is a classical non-linear optimization [24] which iter-atively updates a pose by minimizing the photometric error between input and template images. Their runtime per itera-tion is quite fast. Since the photometric error explicitly con-siders each pixel, they can obtain enough details for accu-rate optimization without the need of zooming in. However, they can fail under diverse illumination or gross pose differ-ences. Although non-linear least squares methods such as inverse compositional image alignment [5, 22] or active ap-pearance models [13, 23] are extremely efficient, straight-forward implementations of such methods can be unstable under significant illumination or pose changes. In addition, their runtime can be slower if many iterations are performed until convergence.
We leverage and improve the latter method to realize both quick and accurate refinement. In this paper, we pro-pose RePOSE, a new feature-based non-linear optimization framework for 6D object pose refinement. The main tech-nical insight presented in this work is that one can learn an image feature representation which is both robust for alignment and fast to compute. As stated earlier, the main impediment of CNN-based refinement methods is that the deep feature must be extracted during the refinement pro-cess iteratively. To remove this, we show that it is possi-ble to directly render deep features using a simple graphics render. The rendering process decouples the shape of the object from the texture. At the time of rendering, texture is mapped to the 3D shape and then projected as a 2D image.
Instead of mapping an RGB valued texture to the object, we can alternatively render a deep feature texture. Then, the rendered object can be directly aligned to the deep features of the input image. By retaining the deep feature represen-tation during rendering, the pose alignment is robust and the refinement process becomes very efficient.
RePOSE refines an object pose by minimizing the dis-tance between the deep features of the input and rendered images. Since the input image is fixed during iterative re-finement, its feature is only computed once using a CNN.
In contrast, the deep feature of the template image are di-rectly generated using a simple computer graphics renderer.
The rendering process takes less than a millisecond which greatly increases the speed of the iterative refinement pro-cess. The deep feature representation is learned such that nonlinear optimization can be easily performed through a differentiable LM optimization network [24]. We experi-mentally found 5 iterations are enough to converge, which contributes to fast 6D object pose refinement.
RePOSE has several practical advantages over recent
CNN-based regression methods: 1) RePOSE can be excep-tionally fast. — In the case of 1 iteration, RePOSE runs at 181 FPS for 5 objects and 244 FPS for 1 object, 2) RePOSE is data efficient. — Since RePOSE considers projective ge-ometry explicitly, there is no need to learn the mapping of the deep feature into an object’s pose from training data. In our experiments, we show that RePOSE achieves better or comparable performance with much fewer number of train-ing images than prior methods, and 3) RePOSE does not request RGB textures of a 3D model. — It has been known that RGB texture scanning has troubles with metalic, dark-colored, or transparent objects even with the latest 3D scan-ner [1]. We believe that the requirement of RGB textures by recent CNN-based regression methods [21, 19] makes the implementation in the real world more challenging.
We evaluate RePOSE on three popular 6D object esti-mation datasets - LineMOD [15], the challenging Occlu-sion LineMOD [6], and YCB-Video [39]. RePOSE sets a new state of the art on the Occlusion LineMOD (51.6%) [6] dataset and achieves comparable performance on the other datasets with much faster speed (80 to 92 FPS with 5 iter-ations). Additionally, we perform ablations to validate the effectiveness of our proposed methods. 2.