Abstract
We propose a novel sparse constrained formulation and from it derive a real-time optimization method for 3D hu-man pose and shape estimation. Our optimization method,
SCOPE (Sparse Constrained Optimization for 3D human
Pose and shapE estimation), is orders of magnitude faster (avg. 4ms convergence) than existing optimization meth-ods, while being mathematically equivalent to their dense unconstrained formulation under mild assumptions. We achieve this by exploiting the underlying sparsity and con-straints of our formulation to efﬁciently compute the Gauss-Newton direction. We show that this computation scales linearly with the number of joints and measurements of a complex 3D human model, in contrast to prior work where it scales cubically due to their dense unconstrained for-mulation. Based on our optimization method, we present a real-time motion capture framework that estimates 3D human poses and shapes from a single image at over 30 FPS. In benchmarks against state-of-the-art methods on multiple public datasets, our framework outperforms other optimization methods and achieves competitive accu-racy against regression methods. Project page with code and videos: https://sites.google.com/view/ scope-human/. 1.

Introduction
Estimating 3D human poses and shapes from an im-age has a broad range of applications in embodied AI, robotics, AR/VR, and has seen remarkable progress in re-cent years. Among leading techniques, optimization meth-ods [4, 15, 16, 21, 22, 35] have been successful. However, they can still take up to tens of seconds to ﬁt 3D hu-man poses and shapes given an image, which is not ideal for real-time applications. Deep learning based regression methods [11, 13] have signiﬁcantly reduced the computa-tion times down to just tens of milliseconds, but often rely on optimization during training or for reﬁning the network outputs. With a novel formulation, we revitalize optimiza-Figure 1: Example solutions from our motion capture framework based on our proposed sparse constrained optimization. (left) in-put image from the 3DPW [33] dataset, (middle) 3D pose and shape reconstruction overlayed on the input image, (right) 3D re-construction shown from a rotated viewpoint. tion towards solving this problem in real-time.
Most optimization methods [4, 15, 16, 21, 22, 35] formu-late 3D human pose and shape estimation as dense uncon-strained optimization problems, differing only in terms of the objective functions. These formulations are dense as they result in dense Hessian matrices and unconstrained as the optimization variables are unconstrained. To opti-mize the objective they use iterative techniques like Gauss-Newton [23] to ﬁnd a local minimum given an initial guess.
These formulations however, suffer from high computa-tion times due to the dense Hessian matrices that lead to
O(K 3) + O(K 2N ) time to compute the Gauss-Newton di-rection for a 3D human model with K joints and N mea-surements. In particular, computing this direction involves the steps of linearization to ﬁnd the Jacobian, building and then solving the linear system, where a dense formulation renders all these steps expensive. Therefore, it is critical to improve the efﬁciency of the Gauss-Newton direction com-putation to develop real-time optimization methods for 3D human pose and shape estimation.
In this work, instead of using the dense uncon-strained formulation from existing optimization methods, we present a sparse constrained formulation that is math-ematically equivalent under mild assumptions. We show how the underlying sparsity and constraints of our formu-lation can be exploited leading to sparse Hessian matrices and ultimately computing the Gauss-Newton direction in
O(K) + O(N ) time for a 3D human model with K joints and N measurements. Our optimization method, SCOPE (Sparse Constrained Optimization for 3D human Pose and shapE estimation), is thus orders of magnitude faster (av-erage 4 ms convergence) than existing optimization meth-ods, particularly when the number of joints K and mea-surements N is large.
Based on our optimization method, we present a real-time 3D motion capture framework (illustrated in Figure 2) that estimates 3D human poses and shapes from a sin-gle image at over 30 FPS. Example solutions are shown in Figure 1. Our method allows using a modiﬁed SMPL model [17] that has 75 degrees of freedom and 10 shape pa-rameters, and estimates both human poses and shapes with which the 3D human mesh can be fully reconstructed. In contrast, several real-time 3D motion capture frameworks using optimization methods [21, 22] adopt a much sim-pler 3D skeleton model with 33 degrees of freedom and no shape parameters to reduce the computation complexity and are therefore unable to reconstruct the 3D human mesh.
We compare our real-time 3D motion capture framework with numerous state-of-the-art methods [4,11,13,14,15,35] on public benchmark datasets [9, 20, 33]. Our framework achieves accuracies that outperform optimization meth-ods [4, 15, 22, 35] and are competitive to regression meth-ods [11, 13].
In summary, our contributions are: (i) we propose a sparse constrained formulation for 3D human pose and shape estimation that is mathematically equivalent to the dense unconstrained formulation of existing optimization methods under mild assumptions; (ii) we develop an ef-ﬁcient algorithm that computes the Gauss-Newton direc-tion in linear-time complexity with respect to the number of joints and measurements; and (iii) we present a real-time 3D motion capture framework that estimates 3D human poses and shapes from a single image. 2.