Abstract
As a fundamental building block in computer vision, edges can be categorised into four types according to the discontinuity in surface-Reﬂectance, Illumination, surface-Normal or Depth. While great progress has been made in detecting generic or individual types of edges, it remains under-explored to comprehensively study all four edge types together.
In this paper, we propose a novel neural net-work solution, RINDNet, to jointly detect all four types of edges. Taking into consideration the distinct attributes of each type of edges and the relationship between them,
RINDNet learns effective representations for each of them and works in three stages. In stage I, RINDNet uses a com-mon backbone to extract features shared by all edges. Then in stage II it branches to prepare discriminative features for each edge type by the corresponding decoder. In stage III, an independent decision head for each type aggregates the features from previous stages to predict the initial results.
Additionally, an attention module learns attention maps for all types to capture the underlying relations between them, and these maps are combined with initial results to gener-ate the ﬁnal edge detection results. For training and evalua-tion, we construct the ﬁrst public benchmark, BSDS-RIND, with all four types of edges carefully annotated. In our ex-periments, RINDNet yields promising results in comparison with state-of-the-art methods. Additional analysis is pre-sented in supplementary material. 1.

Introduction
Edges play an important role in many vision tasks [33, 40, 43, 46]. While generic edge detection [14, 23, 41, 44] has been extensively studied for decades, speciﬁc-edge de-tection recently attracts increasing amount of efforts due to its practical applications concerning on different types of
*The work is partially done while the author was with Stony Brook
University.
† Corresponding author.
Figure 1. Left: Edges are caused by a variety of factors [27, 35].
Right (a-c): Samples of the proposed BSDS-RIND dataset. edges, such as occlusion contours [25, 38, 39] or semantic boundaries [16, 48].
In his seminal work [27], David Marr summarized four basic ways edges can arise: (1) surface-reﬂectance discon-tinuity, (2) illumination discontinuity, (3) surface-normal discontinuity, and (4) depth discontinuity, as shown in
Fig. 1. Recent studies [33, 40, 43, 46] have shown that the above types of edges are beneﬁcial for downstream tasks.
For example, pavement crack detection (reﬂectance discon-tinuity) is a critical task for intelligent transportation [46]; shadow edge (illumination discontinuity) detection is a pre-requisite for shadow removal and path detection [43]; [33] and [40] show that depth edge and normal edge represen-tation prompt reﬁned normal and sharp depth estimation, respectively. Besides, [18] utilizes four types of cues simul-taneously to improve the performance of depth reﬁnement.
Despite their importance, ﬁne-grained edges are still under-explored, especially when compared with generic edges. Generic edge detectors usually treat edges indistin-guishably; while existing studies for speciﬁc edges focus on individual edge type. By contrast, the four fundamen-tal types of edges, to our best knowledge, have never been explored in an integrated edge detection framework.
In this paper, for the ﬁrst time, we propose to detect si-multaneously the four types of edges, namely reﬂectance
edge (RE), illumination edge (IE), normal edge (NE) and depth edge (DE). Although edges share similar patterns in intensity variation in images, they have different physical bases. Speciﬁcally, REs and IEs are mainly related to pho-tometric reasons – REs are caused by changes in material appearance (e.g., texture and color), while IEs are produced by changes in illumination (e.g., shadows, light sources and highlights). By contrast, NEs and DEs reﬂect the geometry changes in object surfaces or depth discontinuity. Consid-ering the correlations and distinctions among all types of edges, we develop a CNN-based solution, named RINDNet, for jointly detecting the above four types of edges.
RINDNet works in three stages. In stage I, it extracts general features and spatial cues from a backbone network for all edges. Then, in stage II, it proceeds with four sep-arate decoders. Speciﬁcally, low-level features are ﬁrst in-tegrated under the guidance of high-level hints by Weight
Layer (WL), and then fed into RE-Decoder and IE-Decoder to produce features for REs and IEs respectively. At the same time, NE/DE-Decoder take the high-level features as input and explore effective features. After that, these fea-tures and accurate spatial cues are forwarded to four deci-sion heads in stage III to predict the initial results. Finally, the attention maps obtained by the Attention Module (AM), which captures the underlying relations between all types, are aggregated with the initial results to generate the ﬁnal predictions. All these components are differentiable, mak-ing RINDNet an end-to-end architecture to jointly optimize the detection of four types of edges.
Training and evaluating edge detectors for all four types of edges request images with all such edges annotated.
In this paper, we create the ﬁrst known such dataset, named BSDS-RIND, by carefully labeling images from the
BSDS [2] benchmark (see Fig. 1). BSDS-RIND allows the
ﬁrst thorough evaluation of edge detection of all four types.
The proposed RINDNet shows clear advantages over pre-vious edge detectors, both quantitatively and qualitatively.
The source code, dataset, and benchmark are available at https://github.com/MengyangPu/RINDNet.
With the above efforts, our study is expected to stimu-late further research along the line, and beneﬁt more down-stream applications with rich edge cues. Our contributions are summarized as follows: (1) We develop a novel end-to-end edge detector, RINDNet, to jointly detect the four types of edges. RINDNet is designed to effectively in-vestigate shared information among different edges (e.g., through feature sharing) and meanwhile ﬂexibly model the distinction between them (e.g., through edge-aware atten-tion). (2) We present the ﬁrst public benchmark, BSDS-RIND, dedicated to studying simultaneously the four edge types, namely reﬂectance edge, illumination edge, normal edge and depth edge. (3) In our experiments, the proposed
RINDNet shows clear advantages over state of the arts. 2.