Abstract
We present a novel approach to the detection of unknown objects in the context of autonomous driving. The problem is formulated as anomaly detection, since we assume that the unknown stuff or object appearance cannot be learned.
To that end, we propose a reconstruction module that can be used with many existing semantic segmentation networks, and that is trained to recognize and reconstruct road (driv-able) surface from a small bottleneck. We postulate that poor reconstruction of the road surface is due to areas that are outside of the training distribution, which is a strong in-dicator of an anomaly. The road structural similarity error is coupled with the semantic segmentation to incorporate information from known classes and produce final per-pixel anomaly scores. The proposed JSR-Net was evaluated on four datasets, Lost-and-found, Road Anomaly, Road Obsta-cles, and FishyScapes, achieving state-of-art performance on all, reducing the false positives significantly, while typ-ically having the highest average precision for wide range of operation points. 1.

Introduction
Autonomous vehicles have quickly become one of the prime application areas of computer vision methods. The range of research topics that have been influenced and stim-ulated by this rapid development is broad: object detec-tion [33], tracking [31, 52], optical flow estimation [51], stereo [49], monocular depth [9] estimation, semantic seg-mentation [53], lidar-camera fusion, 3D mapping and self-localisation [50, 23], to name a few. For many of the prob-lems, the best performing methods are, or include, deep neural networks, which have a voracious appetite for train-ing data; currently mainly labeled data. As a consequence, a vast data acquisition and labeling effort has been tak-ing place, together with research into the use of synthetic
*Corresponding author, vojirtom@fel.cvut.cz
†Czech Technical University in Prague, Faculty of Electrical Engineer-ing, Czech Republic
‡Toyota Motor Europe, Brussels, Belgium data [36, 18], virtual environments and simulators [16], and unsupervised learning [2].
In this work, we present an approach to detect road anomalies in a semantic segmentation setting, in the context of spotting arbitrary “stuff” or objects on the road surface.
The detection of “stuff” on the road is currently formulated as the detection of the known and “unknown unknown” (un-expected and not considered types of “stuff”), which is typ-ical for one-class classification [42] and outlier/anomaly de-tection [6] problems. While the semantic segmentation ex-plains the scene, as viewed in an image, decomposing it into a set of known categories, modelling an appearance that is outside the known classes, or is out of distribution, requires additional consideration.
In the proposed approach, we tightly combine informa-tion about the known class, “road” in our application, with a strategy for estimating previously unseen objects and stuff.
The known class information is captured by a standard seg-mentation deep neural network. The performance on data close to the training distribution is excellent, but its be-haviour on unseen data is variable, as experiments show.
We therefore add a reconstruction network module, arguing, and experimentally verifying, that a failure to reconstruct reliably and predictably is an indicator of an anomaly.
The main contributions of the paper are the following: (i) a novel use of image reconstruction to distinguish one known semantic class from anomalies and outliers, originat-ing from unknown appearance distributions, by explicitly requiring poor reconstruction outside of the known class, (ii) a trainable coupling of information from reconstruction and semantic segmentation that is able to exploit efficiently the two sources of information, (iii) a plug-and-play module that can be used with many segmentation networks without the need of re-training the segmentation part, i.e., adding novel functionality without any semantic segmentation per-formance loss and with a minimal computational and mem-(iv) Achieving state-of-the-art results and ory overhead. better generalization to out-of-distribution data than com-peting methods.
We show quantitative standard and one derivative datasets – Lost-and-found [34], results on three
[28], Road Obstacles and
Road Anomaly
FishyScapes:LaF [4] – where the proposed method,
JSR-Net, outperforms the current state-of-the-art methods often by a large margin.
[27]
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 discusses related work, Section 3 describes the proposed
JSR-Net method and its components, Section 4 provides technical details for reproducibility purposes, Section 5 dis-cusses the experimental results and finally Section 6 sum-marizes the paper conclusions. 2.