Abstract
Although the visual appearances of small-scale objects are not well observed, humans can recognize them by as-sociating the visual cues of small objects from their mem-orized appearance. It is called cued recall. In this paper, motivated by the memory process of humans, we introduce a novel pedestrian detection framework that imitates cued recall in detecting small-scale pedestrians. We propose a large-scale embedding learning with the large-scale pedes-trian recalling memory (LPR Memory). The purpose of the proposed large-scale embedding learning is to memo-rize and recall the large-scale pedestrian appearance via the LPR Memory. To this end, we employ the large-scale pedestrian exemplar set, so that, the LPR Memory can re-call the information of the large-scale pedestrians from the small-scale pedestrians. Comprehensive quantitative and qualitative experimental results validate the effectiveness of the proposed framework with the LPR Memory. 1.

Introduction
Pedestrian detection is one of the important research top-ics in the computer vision field [21, 28, 42, 60].
It has attracted considerable attention in real-world applications such as video surveillance [3, 56] and autonomous driving systems [12, 23]. To detect pedestrians, various modalities have been utilized. The most commonly used modality is the visible modality (e.g. RGB) which is intuitive to human eyes [13]. Also, the thermal modality has been adopted for pedestrian detection recently [17, 24, 25]. The thermal modality has the advantage that it is robust to illumination variation [32] and weather conditions [22].
Despite the strengths of both modalities, pedestrian de-tection still has a problem in detecting small-scale pedes-trians [41, 49]. Although some efforts have been made to mitigate the small-scale issue [29, 53], small-scale pedes-trian detection has an inherent problem. As shown in the top of Figure 1, different from the large-scale pedestrian, the visual appearance of the small-scale pedestrian is often
*Both authors have contributed equally to this work.
†Corresponding author
Figure 1. Comparison between the small- and large-scale pedestri-ans (top) and t-SNE visualization of their latent features (bottom) in (a) visible and (b) thermal modalities. Due to the lack of visual information in the small-scale pedestrians, their latent faetures are hard to be separated from the background. blurred and obscure in both modalities (we divide the small-and large-scales according to [22]). We further visualize the small- and large-scale pedestrians with the background in the feature space using t-SNE [51]. As shown in the bot-tom of Figure 1, the large-scale pedestrian (blue) and the background (red) could be separated from each other easily.
However, feature distributions of the small-scale pedestrian (green) and the background (red) are not distinguishable, so that, it is difficult to discriminate between the small-scale pedestrians and the background. Since the visual appear-ance of the small-scale pedestrians is insufficient, the deep networks are more likely to miss the small-scale pedestri-ans [41, 49, 55].
To tackle the above problem in small-scale pedestrian detection, we consider how humans distinguish the small-scale pedestrians. As observed in Figure 1, the deep net-works are likely to miss the small-scale pedestrians, be-cause they have a lack of visual information. Nevertheless, humans are capable of identifying small-scale pedestrians, even with insufficient visual information. In cognitive psy-chology, humans recognize small-scale objects by recall-ing large-scale ones from their memories based on cues ob-served in the small-scale objects [5, 38]. It is called cued recall. In this way, although the visual information of small-scale pedestrians is insufficient, humans can recognize them as pedestrians based on their visual cues (e.g. head, body, etc.).
Based on our motivation, we propose a novel pedes-trian detection framework to address the small-scale is-sue, by mimicking how humans identify the small-scale pedestrian through cued recall. To this end, we design a
Large-scale Pedestrian Recalling (LPR) Memory to mem-orize and recall the visual appearance of the large-scale pedestrians even with the insufficient small-scale pedes-trian appearances. For the LPR Memory to memorize and recall the prior knowledge about the large-scale pedestri-ans effectively, we devise a large-scale embedding learn-ing. Through the large-scale embedding learning, the pro-posed LPR Memory can effectively cope with the small-scale pedestrians by addressing the relevant information of the large-scale pedestrians, playing a role of cued recall of humans. The comprehensive experiments and visualization results with each modality (thermal and visible) validate the effectiveness of the LPR Memory.
To sum up, the major contributions of this paper are sum-marized as follows:
• Motivated by the process of cued recall, we devise the LPR Memory to resolve the inherent small-scale pedestrian detection problem. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first attempt to handle small-scale pedestrian detection with cued recall of the memory.
• In order to guide the LPR Memory to memorize and recall the appearance of the large-scale pedestrians from the small-scale pedestrians, we devise a large-scale embedding learning. Consequently, our detec-tion framework with the LPR Memory can perform ro-bust small-scale pedestrian detection. 2.