Abstract
The use of deep 3D point cloud models in safety-critical applications, such as autonomous driving, dictates the need to certify the robustness of these models to real-world trans-formations. This is technically challenging, as it requires a scalable veriﬁer tailored to point cloud models that handles a wide range of semantic 3D transformations. In this work, we address this challenge and introduce 3DCertify, the ﬁrst veriﬁer able to certify the robustness of point cloud models. 3DCertify is based on two key insights: (i) a generic relax-ation based on ﬁrst-order Taylor approximations, applica-ble to any differentiable transformation, and (ii) a precise relaxation for global feature pooling, which is more com-plex than pointwise activations (e.g., ReLU or sigmoid) but commonly employed in point cloud models. We demonstrate the effectiveness of 3DCertify by performing an extensive evaluation on a wide range of 3D transformations (e.g., ro-tation, twisting) for both classiﬁcation and part segmenta-tion tasks. For example, we can certify robustness against rotations by ±60° for 95.7% of point clouds, and our max pool relaxation increases certiﬁcation by up to 15.6%. 1.

Introduction
Deep learning has achieved remarkable success in tasks involving 3D objects such as autonomous driving [8, 9, 26].
As such applications are typically safety-critical, recent work has investigated methods for quantifying the robust-ness of these systems via adversarial attacks, demonstrat-ing the vulnerability of state-of-the-art point cloud mod-els to semantic transformations and noise-based perturba-tions [28, 53, 60, 62, 66]. Another line of work introduced defenses [62, 65, 67], aiming to improve a models’ robust-*This work was done while the author was at ETH Zurich. ness against these attacks. However, as demonstrated in the image recognition domain, such defenses are usually bro-ken by more powerful attacks [1, 49], resulting in an arms race between stronger defenses and even stronger attacks.
To break this cycle, one ideally needs a proof that a deep learning model is robust against any adversarial attack, un-der some threat model. This proof is usually obtained by invoking a neural network veriﬁer on a deep learning model and a model input, where the veriﬁer attempts to provide a certiﬁcate that the model is robust to any transformation of this input. While plenty of veriﬁers have been proposed in the image recognition domain [5, 19, 42, 44, 48, 56, 64], no such veriﬁer exists for 3D point cloud models.
In this work
This work: certiﬁcation of 3D point clouds we propose the ﬁrst veriﬁer for 3D point cloud models, called 3DCertify. As point cloud models are too complex for exact veriﬁcation (e.g., MILP [48]), the key challenge one must address is designing scalable and precise convex relaxations capturing all point clouds that could result from transforming the original (input) point cloud. In our work, we address this challenge and introduce such relaxations for a large family of common differentiable 3D transforma-tions, including rotation, twisting, tapering, shearing, and arbitrary compositions of these transformations.
Robustness certiﬁcation is achieved by propagating our 3D relaxations through the network using existing veriﬁers (e.g., DeepPoly [44] or LiRPA [61]). This modular design allows our method to beneﬁt from future advances in ver-iﬁcation. For instance, we observe that existing veriﬁers incur a signiﬁcant loss of precision at the max pool layer, often overlooked when designing veriﬁers for image classi-ﬁers, yet a critical feature of 3D point cloud models [36].
We address this issue by designing a more precise max pool relaxation which is more precise than existing solutions in practice while being applicable beyond point cloud models.
Using 3DCertify, we are able to certify, for the ﬁrst time, the robustness of the PointNet [36] model to semantic trans-formations on two challenging tasks: object classiﬁcation on the ModelNet40 [59] dataset and part segmentation on the ShapeNet [7] dataset. We consider PointNet since, de-spite its relatively simple architecture, it performs well in terms of classiﬁcation, segmentation, and certiﬁcation, and provides the basis for more complex models [37, 52], which could be certiﬁed with future advances in veriﬁcation.
Key contributions Our main contributions are:
• A novel framework based on ﬁrst-order Taylor approx-imations for fast computation of linear relaxations of semantic 3D transformations of point clouds.
• A scalable linear relaxation for max pool that is prov-ably more precise than prior work while being widely applicable to certiﬁcation tasks beyond point clouds.
• The identiﬁcation of inherent accuracy-robustness trade-offs in point cloud networks and a detailed ab-lation study of robustness-enhancing methods.
• The ﬁrst robustness veriﬁer of 3D point cloud models for object classiﬁcation and part segmentation.
• A comprehensive experimental evaluation of our method on the PointNet [36] architecture and differ-ent datasets using a variety of semantic transforma-tions. We make our implementation publicly available at https://github.com/eth-sri/3dcertify. 2.