Abstract
Point clouds acquired from scanning devices are often perturbed by noise, which affects downstream tasks such as surface reconstruction and analysis. The distribution of a noisy point cloud can be viewed as the distribution of a set of noise-free samples p(x) convolved with some noise model n, leading to (p ∗ n)(x) whose mode is the underly-ing clean surface. To denoise a noisy point cloud, we pro-pose to increase the log-likelihood of each point from p ∗ n via gradient ascent—iteratively updating each point’s po-sition. Since p ∗ n is unknown at test-time, and we only need the score (i.e., the gradient of the log-probability func-tion) to perform gradient ascent, we propose a neural net-work architecture to estimate the score of p ∗ n given only noisy point clouds as input. We derive objective functions for training the network and develop a denoising algorithm leveraging on the estimated scores. Experiments demon-strate that the proposed model outperforms state-of-the-art methods under a variety of noise models, and shows the potential to be applied in other tasks such as point cloud upsampling. 1.

Introduction
Point clouds consist of discrete 3D points irregularly sampled from continuous surfaces.
It is an increasingly popular representation widely applied in autonomous driv-ing, robotics and immersive tele-presence. However, point clouds are often perturbed by noise due to the inherent lim-itations of acquisition equipments or matching ambiguities in the reconstruction from images. Noise in point clouds significantly affects downstream tasks such as rendering, reconstruction and analysis since the underlying structures are deformed. Hence, point cloud denoising is crucial to relevant 3D vision applications. Nevertheless, point cloud denoising is challenging due to the irregular and unordered
*Corresponding author: Wei Hu (forhuwei@pku.edu.cn).
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (61972009).
Figure 1. An illustration of the proposed point cloud denoising method. We first estimate the score of the noise-convolved distri-bution ∇x log[(p ∗ n)(x)] from the noisy point cloud. Then, we perform gradient ascent using the estimated score to denoise the point cloud. characteristics of point clouds.
Early point cloud denoising methods are optimization-based [6, 16, 4, 1, 2, 22, 31, 36], which rely heavily on geometric priors and are sometimes challenging to strike a balance between the detail preservation and denoising effectiveness. Recently, deep-learning-based approaches have emerged and achieved promising denoising perfor-mance thanks to the advent of neural network architec-tures crafted for point clouds [24, 25, 32]. The majority of deep-learning-based denoising models predict the displace-ment of noisy points from the underlying surface and then apply the inverse displacement to the noisy point clouds
[7, 26, 11, 23]. This class of methods mainly suffer from two types of artifacts: shrinkage and outliers, which arise from over-estimation or under-estimation of the displace-ment. Instead, Luo et al. [21] proposed to learn the under-lying manifold of a noisy point cloud for reconstruction in a downsample-upsample architecture, which alleviates the issue of outliers by learning to filter out high-noise points in the downsampling stage. However, the downsampling stage
inevitably causes detail loss especially at low noise levels.
In this paper, we propose a novel paradigm of point cloud denoising motivated by the distributional properties of noisy point clouds. Point clouds consist of points sampled from the surface of 3D objects. Therefore, a noise-free point cloud can be modeled as a set of samples from some 3D distribution p(x) supported by 2D manifolds. If the point cloud is corrupted by noise, the distribution about the noisy point cloud can be modeled as the convolution between the original distribution p and some noise model n (e.g., Gaus-sian noise), expressed as (p ∗ n)(x). Under some mild as-sumptions about the noise model n (see Section 4 for de-tails), the mode of p ∗ n is the underlying clean surface, having higher probability than its ambient space. Accord-ing to this observation, denoising a noisy point cloud nat-urally amounts to moving noisy points towards the mode, which can be realized by performing gradient ascent on the log-probability function log[(p∗n)(x)], as illustrated in Fig-ure 1. As the points are expected to converge to the mode of distribution after sufficient iterations of gradient ascent, our method is more robust against artifacts such as shrinkage and outliers, while previous methods have no awareness of the mode.
However, there is a major challenge to address in or-der to implement this method—p ∗ n is unknown at test-time, which has to be estimated from the input noisy point cloud only. To tackle this challenge, we propose a detail-preserving neural network architecture to estimate the score of the distribution underlying an input noisy point cloud
∇x log[(p ∗ n)(x)], i.e., the gradient of the log-probability function. We also formulate the objective function for train-ing the score estimation network and develop a denoising algorithm. Further, we provide an analysis of the model from the perspective of probability, revealing the principle behind the model formally. Extensive experiments demon-strate that the proposed model outperforms state-of-the-art methods, and has the potential to be applied to other tasks such as point cloud upsampling.
To summarize, the contributions of this work include:
• We propose a novel paradigm of point cloud denoising, exploiting the distribution model of noisy point clouds and leveraging the score of the distribution.
• To implement the method, we propose a neural net-work architecture for score-estimation from noisy point clouds, formulate objective functions for train-ing the network, and develop the denoising algorithm.
• Extensive experiments demonstrate the capability of the proposed method under a variety of noise models. 2.