Abstract
The domain-adaptive semantic segmentation of aerial images using a deep-learning technique is still challenging owing to the domain gaps between aerial images obtained in different areas. Currently, various convolutional neural network (CNN)-based domain adaptation methods have been developed to decrease the domain gaps. However, they still show poor performance for object segmentation when they are applied to images from other domains.
In this paper, we propose a novel CNN-based self-mutating net-work (SMN), which can adaptively adjust the parameter values of convolutional ﬁlters as a response to the domain of an input image for better domain-adaptive segmenta-tion. For the SMN, the parameter mutation technique was devised for adaptively changing parameters, and a param-eter ﬂuctuation technique was developed to randomly con-vulse the parameters. By adopting the parameter mutation and ﬂuctuation, adaptive self-changing and ﬁne-tuning of parameters can be realized for images from different do-mains, resulting in better prediction in domain-adaptive segmentation. Meanwhile, the results of the ablation study indicate that the SMN provided 11.19% higher Intersec-tion over Union values than other state-of-the-art meth-ods, demonstrating its potential for the domain-adaptive segmentation of aerial images. 1.

Introduction
Aerial imagery has been widely utilized for urban plan-ning, autonomous vehicles, and digital map generation in the ﬁeld of remote sensing.
In particular, building segmentation is crucial for digital map generation us-ing aerial imagery. To segment buildings from aerial im-ages, many convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [18]-based segmentation methods have been developed so far
[26, 34, 37]. CNN-based segmentation methods outper-form classical segmentation methods in the segmenta-tion of buildings from aerial images. However, in gen-eral, aerial imagery has a variety of domains depending on time, countries, and aviation providers. Aerial images (a) (b) (c) (d)
Figure 1: Sample images in different domain: (a) In-ria Dataset, (b) Massachusetts Dataset, (c) WHU Dataset, and (d) Our Urban Dataset from various domains typically exhibit different resolu-tions, locations, and styles (Fig. 1). Although CNNs have shown powerful capabilities in a wide range of ﬁelds, they exhibit severe performance degradation when CNNs are applied to unobserved scenes and objects in other do-mains for various applications [7, 11]. That is, when a net-work trained with an aerial image of one main is applied to segment buildings from an aerial image of another do-main, severe performance degradation of the network has been observed [5, 24, 38]. Therefore, domain adapta-tion (DA) has recently gained attention as an unmet need technique for resolving the limitations of CNNs.
To address this problem, a few deep learning tech-niques have been developed, such as transfer learning
[24, 30, 38] and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
[10]. The transfer learning technique that reuses deep learning networks optimized in one domain has been in-troduced for many applications [24, 30, 38]. Despite the improved performance of the transfer learning technique for a building segmentation task, the transfer learning for the DA of aerial images did not show sufﬁcient perfor-mance owing to a domain gap. Meanwhile, GANs have gained great attention as a novel technique that can be applied to DA [5, 36]. By using the GAN, style trans-fer for DA was realized.
In addition, GAN-based layers were developed to decrease the domain gap during train-ing [2, 8, 9]. However, because the images translated by
GAN are not perfectly recognized as an image in the same domain, generalized feature extractions cannot be fully achieved [31]. That is, because the domain gap still ex-Figure 2: Flowchart of a self-mutating network. Encoder (E) and Decoder (D) of the network are optimized by three paths of loss functions simultaneously. In the inference step, the optimized network is ﬁne-tuned by two steps of (1) parameter
ﬂuctuation and (2) parameter mutation. ists after the DA, the performance of DA still needs to be improved to reduce the domain gap.
In this paper, we demonstrate a new GAN-based pa-rameter self-mutating network to improve the building segmentation of aerial images from different domains.
Here, rather than developing a new method to reduce the domain gap from different domains, we propose a net-work that is capable of converting the inherent properties of the network itself as a response to the domain of an in-put image. Therefore, we designed a GAN-based network called a self-mutating network (SMN). The SMN adjusts the parameter values of the convolution ﬁlters themselves as a response to the domain of an input image in the prediction step using two novel techniques: (1) param-eter mutation, in which the parameters of a network are changed as the domain of inputs alongside the adaptation process of GAN, and (2) parameter ﬂuctuation, in which the parameters of a convolutional network are ﬁnely os-cillated to add randomness, resulting in an increase in the entropy of the network. Fig. 2 shows the ﬂowchart of the
SMN algorithm. The main contributions of this study are summarized as follows:
• We developed a novel GAN-based self-mutating net-work for the precise domain-adaptive semantic seg-mentation of aerial images from different domains.
The network ﬁne-tunes the parameters of the model on every testing image using two techniques:
• Parameter mutation: A ﬁne-tuning technique for pa-rameters of convolutional ﬁlters. GAN-based opti-mization within the prediction step adjusts the val-ues of the parameters in response to the domain of an input aerial image.
• Parameter ﬂuctuation: A technique of adding ran-domness to the parameters of convolutional ﬁlters.
While parameters are randomly vibrating, and the entropy of the network increases. 2.