Abstract
Cryo-Electron Tomography (cryo-ET) is a powerful tool for 3D cellular visualization. Due to instrumental limita-tions, cryo-ET images and their volumetric reconstruction suffer from extremely low signal-to-noise ratio. In this pa-per, we propose a novel end-to-end self-supervised learning model, the Sparsity Constrained Network (SC-Net), to re-store volumetric image from single noisy data in cryo-ET.
The proposed method only requires a single noisy data as training input and no ground-truth is needed in the whole training procedure. A new target function is proposed to preserve both local smoothness and detailed structure. Ad-ditionally, a novel procedure for the simulation of electron tomographic photographing is designed to help the evalua-tion of methods. Experiments are done on three simulated data and four real-world data. The results show that our method could produce a strong enhancement for a single very noisy cryo-ET volumetric data, which is much better than the state-of-the-art Noise2Void, and with a competitive performance comparing with Noise2Noise. Code is avail-able at https://github.com/icthrm/SC-Net. 1.

Introduction
Cryo-ET is a powerful technique for the visualization of cellular ultrastructure and macromolecules in three-dimensional space, where 3D structures can be recon-structed from a series of 2D images (tilt series) taken from different angles [6, 9]. However, due to instrumental limita-tions, cryo-ET volumetric images always suffer from ex-tremely low Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR). To restore the corrupted ultrastructure from noisy 3D volume is an essen-tial task in cryo-ET data analysis.
Recently, trainable Deep Neural Network (DNN) based image restoration model has attracted much attention be-cause of its excellent performance, which can be divided
*All should (zhangfa@ict.ac.cn) and Renmin Han (hanrenmin@sdu.edu.cn). correspondence addressed be to
Fa Zhang into two categories: clean-target-based supervised learning model and self-supervised learning model. The supervised learning model needs plenty of “noisy-clean” image pairs to train a reliable model. Although supervised learning model is able to achieve very good performance with clearly de-ﬁned datasets, it cannot well handle the real-world noisy data whose ground-truth or noisy pattern is unavailable, for example, the cryo-ET data. To improve this, self-supervised model is proposed. Self-supervised model does not need ground-truth information during training, in which the su-pervisory information is observed from the original noisy data. Recently, Noise2Noise (N2N) [19] and Noise2Void (N2V) [17] have emerged as two main branches of self-supervised restoration model. Speciﬁcally, N2V is able to perform single-image training. However, for the images with very high noise, the results produced by N2V may still be too noisy, especially for the 3D volumetric image.
Here, we mainly focus on the image restoration of volu-metric data in cryo-Electron Tomography (cryo-ET). One possible data enhancement strategy is to ﬁrst ﬁlter the 2D projections and then build a denoised 3D tomographic volume [21]. Although such procedure can produce a smoothed tomography, its output is usually over-smoothed and loses a lot of ﬁne-grained structures. Because the ﬁlter-ing operation on 2D projections cannot strictly keep the 2D-to-3D relationship deﬁned by Fourier-slice-theorem [24], it is more reasonable to directly operate on the 3D cryo-ET volumetric image [6]. However, it is very hard to acquire a large number of homogeneous volumetric images for a spe-ciﬁc kind of specimen in cryo-ET, which hampers the appli-cation of restoration models relied on large training dataset.
In this paper, we propose a self-supervised deep learn-ing model, the Sparsity Constrained Network (SC-Net), to directly restore cryo-ET 3D volumetric image from only a single noisy data. By combining the structure information from raw noisy volume and local smoothness information from smoothed representation, our proposed model can sup-press high-frequency noise and preserve ultrastructure de-tails in a self-supervised manner, requiring only one single
Figure 1: The Architecture of SC-Net. The workﬂow starts with a set of projections, which will be (i) reconstructed to generate a raw noisy volumetric image, (ii) ﬁltered and reconstructed to generate a smoothed volumetric image, respectively.
SC-Net adapts a blind-spot replacement on the noisy volume for model training and utilizes the local smooth (sparsity) information extracted from the smoothed volume to guide the training. noisy data as input during training. Experiments done on both simulated and real-world datasets show that SC-Net can produce strong enhancement for noisy input, much bet-ter than the ones produced by Noise2Void trained on sin-gle noisy input and competitive with the ones produced by
Noise2Noise (3D) trained on hundreds of tomograms.
The main contributions are as follows:
• A self-supervised volumetric image restoration archi-tecture is proposed, by adapting a blind-spot approach with sparsity constraint extracted from a self-lifted rep-resentation of the input data (shown in Figure 1).
• Up-sampling block is ﬁrst introduced to self-supervised restoration network as a module for aug-mentation to preserve structure details and prevent the output from being over-smoothed.
• A new combined loss function is devised in our im-age restoration model, in which the sparsity informa-tion in self-lifted representation is used to enforce local smoothness in structure restoration.
• A general procedure for the simulation of electron to-mographic photographing and imaging is proposed, for the ease of quantitative analysis. 2.