Abstract
Recently, various works that attempted to introduce rota-tion invariance to point cloud analysis have devised point-pair features, such as angles and distances. In these meth-ods, however, the point-pair is only comprised of the center point and its adjacent points in a vicinity, which may bring information loss to the local feature representation. In this paper, we instead connect each point densely with all other points in a local neighborhood to compose the point-pairs.
Speciﬁcally, we present a simple but effective local feature representation, called sorted Gram matrix(SGM), which is not only invariant to arbitrary rotations, but also models the pair-wise relationship of all the points in a neighbor-hood.
In more detail, we utilize vector inner product to model distance- and angle-information between two points, and in a local patch it naturally forms a Gram matrix. In order to guarantee permutation invariance, we sort the cor-relation value in Gram matrix for each point, therefore this geometric feature names sorted Gram matrix. Furthermore, we mathematically prove that the Gram matrix is rotation-invariant and sufﬁcient to model the inherent structure of a point cloud patch. We then use SGM as features in convo-lution, which can be readily integrated as a drop-in module into any point-based networks. Finally, we evaluated the proposed method on two widely used datasets, and it out-performs previous state-of-the-arts on both shape classiﬁ-cation and part segmentation tasks by a large margin. 1.

Introduction
In the past few years, the development of 3D computer vision has ﬂourished due to its wide applications, such as robotics, AR/VR and self-driving. Point cloud, the most common format of 3D data, has attracted more and more at-tention, and plenty of works [19, 20, 1, 25, 13, 26, 24] have been proposed to extract 3D features directly on points.
*Corresponding author. This work was supported by National Key
R&D Program of China (Grant No.2020AAA010400X).
Figure 1. Illustration of simpliﬁed PPFs and our improved dense-connected version. In ﬁgure(a), the PPFs are constructed between center point pc and neighbor point pj by distance ||xj||(xj = pj − pc) and angle ∠(m, xj)(m = Opc, O is a reference point, such as mass center), which cannot fully constraint pj, letting it freely positioned in the circle Ω, thus leads to information loss.
In ﬁgure(b), we densely connect every point-pair exhaustively and compute each pair’s distance and angle information by an inner product which, forms a Gram matrix, leading to a ﬁxed local struc-ture.
Compared to dense images, point clouds are irregular and unstructured, thus it is necessary to design permutation invariant feature extractors, which is handled by Point-Net [19] using symmetric functions. Besides that, spatial transformation, including translation and rotation, is gener-ally common in 3D world. Therefore, the learned represen-tation of the point cloud should also be invariant to transla-tion and rotation [19]. While translation-invariance can be accomplished perfectly by using weight sharing as 2D con-volution does in an image, rotation-invariance in 3D point cloud has not been well resolved due to its spacial complex-ity.
In essence, rotation-invariance is crucial in some spe-ciﬁc tasks, such as classiﬁcation, part segmentation, match-ing and shape retrieval, as in these tasks, the objects or the whole scene can be arbitrarily rotated. Hence, it is necessary to ensure that the learned point cloud feature is rotation-invariant, and in particular, the local patch descrip-by removing the computationally costly normal estimation.
However, this leads to much information loss for local rep-resentation, as depicted in Figure 1(a). ClusterNet [3] de-ﬁned a plane using original point as reference and sort the projected angles among neighbors, which fully constrained the local patch, but loses the rotation-invariance for its local feature representation similar to AECNN [31]. For all these
PPF-based methods, although they help the network gen-eralize to unseen rotations, their performance is relatively lower than LRF-based methods.
For simplicity and generalizability, we follow the track of utilizing point-pair features, and improve it by connect-ing every pair of points exhaustively in a neighborhood to obtain a complete local geometric representation. To this end, we use the vector inner product between all point pairs to model the distance and angle information, which nat-urally forms a Gram matrix in a neighborhood.
In order to guarantee permutation-invariant, we sort the correlation value in the Gram matrix for each point, so this geometric feature names sorted Gram matrix. We use the SGM them-selves as features in the convolution, which can be readily implemented as a drop-in module in any point-based net-work.
Main contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose a simple and effective local feature repre-sentation, named SGM, which not only keeps invariant to arbitrary rotations, but also models the pairwise re-lationship of all the points in a neighborhood.
• We pack the SGM as a drop-in module, and integrate it into many popular point-based networks, showing the robustness, efﬁciency and generalizability of the SGM.
• We illustrate that our proposed method is invariant to rotation and achieves state-of-the-art results in both point cloud shape classiﬁcation and part segmentation tasks. 2.