Abstract w/o Prior  adaptation w/ Prior  adaptation
Category-level 6D object pose estimation aims to predict the position and orientation for unseen objects, which plays a pillar role in many scenarios such as robotics and aug-mented reality. The signiﬁcant intra-class variation is the bottleneck challenge in this task yet remains unsolved so far.
In this paper, we take advantage of category prior to over-come this problem by innovating a structure-guided prior adaptation scheme to accurately estimate 6D pose for in-dividual objects. Different from existing prior based meth-ods, given one object and its corresponding category prior, we propose to leverage their structure similarity to dynam-ically adapt the prior to the observed object. The prior adaptation intrinsically associates the adopted prior with different objects, from which we can accurately reconstruct the 3D canonical model of the speciﬁc object for pose es-timation. To further enhance the structure characteristic of objects, we extract low-rank structure points from the dense object point cloud, therefore more efﬁciently incorporating sparse structural information during prior adaptation. Ex-tensive experiments on CAMERA25 and REAL275 bench-marks demonstrate signiﬁcant performance improvement.
Project homepage: https://www.cse.cuhk.edu. hk/˜kaichen/projects/sgpa/sgpa.html. 1.

Introduction
Category-level 6D object pose estimation is increasingly studied and plays a pillar role in many real-world appli-cations such as robotic manipulation [9], augmented real-ity [24], and 3D scene understanding [7, 18]. The goal is to predict position and orientation for novel objects of the same category, so as to achieve robust applicability. Dif-ferent from conventional instance-level [12, 20, 30, 35] ob-ject pose estimation, which gives instance CAD models and predicts poses for the instances that have been seen during training, category-level task requires capturing the general properties while accounting for the large variation of differ-Prior Point 
Cloud
Camera 
Instance I
Camera 
Instance II
Figure 1. Pose estimation results of two camera instances with dif-ferent structures. (i) Instance I is similar to the categorical prior, method w/o prior adaptation can handle pose estimation for such cases. (ii) Instance II is very different from the prior in structure, method w/o prior adaptation fails to associate the prior with the in-stance, leading to inaccurate pose estimation. Our proposed prior adaptation method can overcome this challenge with accurate pose estimation for various novel objects (noting the orientation axis). ent instances within a category.
Current methods for this challenging problem are still limited so far. First of all, to address intra-class variation of objects, a canonical object space has been resorted as a uniﬁed coordinate system [4, 26, 32, 33]. In this normal-ized space, a 3D structural model is reconstructed for each object with the same size and orientation. However, such normalization lacks explicit representation of shape varia-tions across different objects of the same category, therefore limiting the accuracy of 6D pose estimation. Later on, to overcome this problem, SPD [26] is proposed to reconstruct canonical object models with category-level shape priors.
A point cloud prior is built for each category, and further deformed to reconstruct the canonical 3D model for a new object.
However, such category-level prior is static and therefore not adaptable to individual instances, i.e., the same prior is applied to all instances of the same category. This greatly hinders the generalization ability of the method, especially
on those objects with signiﬁcant difference to the recon-structed prior. For example, as illustrated in Figure 1, when we apply SPD to two different camera instances with dif-ferent shapes, the performance can be distinct. For camera instance I which has a similar point cloud with the prior, the 6D pose can be well estimated. Unfortunately, for camera instance II which instead has a longer lens, the shape prior is no longer representative for the speciﬁc case, thus severely degrading the pose estimation performance.
In this paper, we propose a novel Structure-Guided Prior
Adaptation network (SGPA), which can dynamically adapt the category-level prior to each particular instance. It adapts the static prior to the observed object according to the struc-ture similarity between the prior and the object. Given the geometry features of prior and object point cloud, our SGPA uses a transformer network to build a long-term dependence between them to model the structure similarity. Based on this similarity, SGPA then dynamically adjusts the prior feature by injecting instance information into the prior fea-ture. Speciﬁcally, we propagate the instance semantic fea-ture along the extracted structure similarity to correspond-ing prior features. We argue that the structure similarity that is overlooked in existing methods can effectively bridge the prior with the instance. In addition, adaptively injecting in-stance semantic features into the prior can effectively miti-gate the gap between the prior and the instance.
Furthermore, densely propagating the semantic feature point by point is prone to introduce noises into the prior fea-ture, because not all points are representative enough to be used to propagate semantic features from instance to prior.
To further leverage the inherent structure characteristic of instances for prior adaptation, we design an auxiliary net-work to extract sparse key-points from the dense input point cloud. Based on the extracted key-point information, we de-velop a structure regularized low-rank transformer, in which the extracted key-points are assembled with our SGPA for efﬁcient structure guided prior adaptation. The adapted prior feature ﬁnally is used in a deformation based frame-work to reconstruct a canonical model for the instance, and match it with the instance point cloud for 6D pose estima-tion. We summarize our main contributions as follows:
• We propose a novel prior based category-level 6D ob-ject pose estimation framework, in which we dynami-cally adapt the categorical prior to each particular in-stance for object pose estimation.
• We propose SGPA, a novel structure-guided prior adaptation network. It uses a transformer network to model the global structure similarity between prior and object, based on which the object semantic information is injected into the prior feature for prior adaptation.
• We propose a structure regularized low-rank trans-former. By regularizing the low-rank projection with the projection of point cloud key-points, the derived low-rank transformer manages to leverage the feature on distinctive key-point positions for a more effective prior adaptation.
• We conduct extensive experiments on well-acknowledged CAMERA25 and REAL275 bench-marks. Our method achieves dramatic performance improvements over other for category-level 6D object pose estimation. existing methods 2.