Abstract
Skeleton-based human action recognition has attracted increasing attention in recent years. However, most of the existing works focus on supervised learning which re-quiring a large number of annotated action sequences that are often expensive to collect. We investigate unsuper-vised representation learning for skeleton action recogni-tion, and design a novel skeleton cloud colorization tech-nique that is capable of learning skeleton representations from unlabeled skeleton sequence data. Specifically, we represent a skeleton action sequence as a 3D skeleton cloud and colorize each point in the cloud according to its temporal and spatial orders in the original (unanno-tated) skeleton sequence. Leveraging the colorized skele-ton point cloud, we design an auto-encoder framework that can learn spatial-temporal features from the artificial color labels of skeleton joints effectively. We evaluate our skeleton cloud colorization approach with action classifiers trained under different configurations, including unsuper-vised, semi-supervised and fully-supervised settings. Exten-sive experiments on NTU RGB+D and NW-UCLA datasets show that the proposed method outperforms existing unsu-pervised and semi-supervised 3D action recognition meth-ods by large margins, and it achieves competitive perfor-mance in supervised 3D action recognition as well. 1.

Introduction
Human action recognition is a fast developing area due to its wide applications in human-computer interaction, video surveillance, game control, etc. According to the types of input data, human action recognition can be grouped into different categories such as RGB-based [2, 35, 38, 42, 47, 49, 55, 56], depth-based [26, 28, 45] and 3D skeleton-based
[1, 9, 17, 18, 20, 21, 31], etc. Among these types of inputs, 3D skeleton data, which represents a human body by the lo-cations of keypoints in the 3D space, has attracted increas-*Corresponding author. ing attention in recent years. Compared with RGB videos or depth data, 3D skeleton data encodes high-level represen-tations of human behaviors and it is generally lightweight and robust to the variations in appearances, surrounding dis-tractions, viewpoint changes, etc. Additionally, skeleton se-quences can be easily captured by depth sensors and thus a large number of supervised methods have been designed to learn spatio-temporal representations for skeleton based action recognition.
Deep neural networks have been widely studied to model the spatio-temporal representation of skeleton sequences under supervised scenarios [9, 20, 21, 31]. For example,
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) has been explored for modelling skeleton actions since it can capture temporal re-lations well [6, 20, 21, 29, 52]. Convolutional Neural Net-works (CNNs) have also been explored to build skeleton-based recognition frameworks by converting joint coordi-nates to 2D maps [5, 9, 13, 43]. In addition, Graph Con-volution Networks (GCNs) have attracted increasing at-tention due to their outstanding performance [27, 31, 48].
However, all these methods are supervised which require a large number of labelled training samples that are of-ten costly to collect. How to learn effective feature rep-resentations with minimal annotations thus becomes criti-cally important. To the best of our knowledge, only a few works [10, 14, 19, 37, 54] explored representation learn-ing from unlabelled skeleton data for the task of action recognition, where the major approach is to reconstruct skeleton sequences from the encoded features via certain encoder-decoder structures. Unsupervised skeleton-based action representation learning remains a great challenge.
In this work, we propose to represent skeleton sequences as a 3D skeleton cloud, and design an unsupervised repre-sentation learning scheme that learns features from spatial and temporal color labels. We treat a skeletal sequence as a spatial-temporal skeleton cloud by stacking the skeleton data of all frames together, and colorize each point in the cloud according to its temporal and spatial orders in the original skeleton sequence. Specifically, we learn spatial-temporal features from the corresponding joints’ colors by
Figure 1. The pipeline of our proposed unsupervised representation learning method, using a novel skeleton cloud colorization scheme.
Given a 3D skeleton sequence, we first stack it into a raw skeleton cloud Pr and then colorize it into 3 skeleton clouds Pτ , Ps, and Pp (construction details shown in Figs. 3 and 4) according to spatial, temporal, and person-level information, respectively. With the three colorized clouds as self-supervision signal, three encoder-decoders (with the same structure but no weight sharing) learn discriminative skeleton representative features. (The encoder and decode details are provided in supplementary material.) leveraging a point-cloud based auto-encoder framework as shown in Fig. 1. By repainting the whole skeleton cloud, our network can achieve unsupervised skeleton representa-tion learning successfully by learning both spatial and tem-poral information from unlabeled skeleton sequences.
The contributions of this paper are threefold. First, we formulate unsupervised action representation learning as 3D skeleton cloud repainting problem, where each skele-ton sequence is treated as a skeleton cloud and can be di-rectly processed with a point cloud auto-encoder frame-work. Second, we propose a novel skeleton cloud coloriza-tion scheme that colorizes each point in the skeleton cloud based on its temporal and spatial orders in the skeleton se-quence. The color labels ‘fabricate’ self-supervision signals which boost unsupervised skeleton action representation learning significantly. Third, extensive experiments show that our method outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised and semi-supervised skeleton action recognition methods by large margins, and its performance is also on par with supervised skeleton-based action recognition methods.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that converts the unsupervised skeleton representation learning problem into a novel skeleton cloud repainting task. 2.