Abstract
Point cloud completion aims to predict a complete shape in high accuracy from its partial observation. However, previous methods usually suffered from discrete nature of point cloud and unstructured prediction of points in lo-cal regions, which makes it hard to reveal ﬁne local geo-metric details on the complete shape. To resolve this is-sue, we propose SnowﬂakeNet with Snowﬂake Point De-convolution (SPD) to generate the complete point clouds.
The SnowﬂakeNet models the generation of complete point clouds as the snowﬂake-like growth of points in 3D space, where the child points are progressively generated by split-ting their parent points after each SPD. Our insight of re-vealing detailed geometry is to introduce skip-transformer in SPD to learn point splitting patterns which can ﬁt lo-cal regions the best. Skip-transformer leverages attention mechanism to summarize the splitting patterns used in the previous SPD layer to produce the splitting in the current
SPD layer. The locally compact and structured point cloud generated by SPD is able to precisely capture the structure characteristic of 3D shape in local patches, which enables the network to predict highly detailed geometries, such as
*Equal contribution. This work was supported by National Key R&D
Program of China (2020YFF0304100), the National Natural Science Foun-dation of China (62072268), and in part by Tsinghua-Kuaishou Institute of
Future Media Data. The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu. smooth regions, sharp edges and corners. Our experimental results outperform the state-of-the-art point cloud comple-tion methods under widely used benchmarks. Code will be available at https://github.com/AllenXiangX/
SnowflakeNet. 1.

Introduction
In 3D computer vision [11, 18, 20, 14, 13] applications, raw point clouds captured by 3D scanners and depth cam-eras are usually sparse and incomplete [53, 54, 48] due to occlusion and limited sensor resolution. Therefore, point cloud completion [53, 43], which aims to predict a com-plete shape from its partial observation, is vital for various downstream tasks. Beneﬁting from large-scaled point cloud datasets, deep learning based point cloud completion meth-ods have been attracting more research interests. Current methods either constrain the generation of point clouds by following a hierarchical rooted tree structure [46, 55, 43] or assume a speciﬁc topology [56, 53] for the target shape.
However, most of these methods suffered from discrete na-ture of point cloud and unstructured prediction of points in local regions, which makes it hard to preserve a well ar-ranged structure for points in local patches. It is still chal-lenging to capture the local geometric details and structure characteristic on the complete shape, such as smooth re-gions, sharp edges and corners, as illustrated in Figure 1.
In order to address this problem, we propose a novel net-P1
P2
P3 (a)
P1
P2 (b)
P2
P3
Figure 2. Illustration of snowﬂake point deconvolution (SPD) for growing part of a car. To show the local change more clearly, we only illustrate some sample points as parent points in the same patch and demonstrate their splitting paths for child points, which are marked as gray and red lines. (a) illustrates the SPD of point splitting from a coarse point cloud P1 (512 points) to its splitting
P2 (2048 points). (b) illustrates the SPD of point splitting from P2 to dense complete point cloud P3 (16384 points), where the child points are expanding like the growth process of snowﬂakes. work called SnowﬂakeNet, especially focusing on the de-coding process to complete partial point clouds. Snowﬂak-eNet mainly consists of layers of Snowﬂake Point Decon-volution (SPD), which models the generation of complete point clouds like the snowﬂake growth of points in 3D space. We progressively generate points by stacking one
SPD layer upon another, where each SPD layer produces child points by splitting their parent point with inheriting shape characteristics captured by the parent point. Figure 2 illustrates the process of SPD and point-wise splitting.
Our insight of revealing detailed geometry is to intro-duce skip-transformer in SPD to learn point splitting pat-terns which can ﬁt local regions the best. Compared with the previous methods, which often ignore the spatial rela-tionship among points [56, 43, 31] or simply learn through self-attention in a single level of multi-step point cloud de-coding [53, 29, 46], our skip-transformer is proposed to in-tegrate the spatial relationships across different levels of de-coding. Therefore, it can establish a cross-level spatial re-lationships between points in different decoding steps, and reﬁne their location to produce more detailed structure. To achieve this, skip-transformer leverages attention mecha-nism to summarize the splitting patterns used in the pre-vious SPD layer, which aims to produce the splitting in cur-rent SPD layer. The skip-transformer can learn the shape context and the spatial relationship between the points in local patches. This enables the network to precisely capture the structure characteristic in each local patches, and predict a better point cloud shape for both smooth plane and sharp edges in 3D space. We achieved the state-of-the-art com-pletion accuracy under the widely used benchmarks. Our main contributions can be summarized as follows.
• We propose a novel SnowﬂakeNet for point cloud completion. Compared with previous locally unorga-nized complete shape generation methods, Snowﬂak-eNet can interpret the generation process of complete point cloud into an explicit and locally structured pat-tern, which greatly improves the performance of 3D shape completion.
• We propose the novel Snowﬂake Point Deconvolu-tion (SPD) for progressively increasing the number of points. It reformulates the generation of child points from parent points as a growing process of snowﬂake, where the shape characteristic embedded by the parent point features is extracted and inherited into the child points through a point-wise splitting operation.
• We introduce a novel skip-transformer to learn split-ting patterns in SPD. It learns shape context and spatial relationship between child points and parent points, which encourages SPD to produce locally structured and compact point arrangements, and capture the structure characteristic of 3D surface in local patches. 2.