Abstract
Input
SPatchGAN U-GAT-IT Council-GAN ACL-GAN
For unsupervised image-to-image translation, we pro-pose a discriminator architecture which focuses on the sta-tistical features instead of individual patches. The network is stabilized by distribution matching of key statistical fea-tures at multiple scales. Unlike the existing methods which impose more and more constraints on the generator, our method facilitates the shape deformation and enhances the fine details with a greatly simplified framework. We show that the proposed method outperforms the existing state-of-the-art models in various challenging applications includ-ing selfie-to-anime, male-to-female and glasses removal. 1.

Introduction
Unsupervised image-to-image translation has become an area of growing interest in computer vision. Powered by generative adversarial networks (GANs) [7], recent works
[37, 17, 20, 31, 1, 10, 6, 30, 19] are able to change the local texture and style of the images without the assistance of any paired data. However, these methods still have difficulty with tasks which require a larger shape deformation. Our goal is to improve unsupervised image-to-image translation for applications which involve geometric changes between the source and the target domains.
GANs are trained by a game between a generator net-work and a discriminator network. At the core of the mod-ern unsupervised image translation frameworks [37, 10, 16, 27, 26, 35] is a PatchGAN discriminator [11]. Instead of giving a single real vs. fake probability for the whole image,
PatchGAN produces multiple outputs for multiple overlap-ping image patches. It helps with the convergence of the network by involving less parameters and stopping at a rel-atively low-level scale [11].
PatchGAN is feasible for identifying a specific type of texture all over the image, since it processes all the patches by the same set of convolutional weights. However, we find (a) Selfie-to-anime
Input
SPatchGAN U-GAT-IT Council-GAN ACL-GAN (b) Male-to-female
Input
SPatchGAN U-GAT-IT Council-GAN ACL-GAN (c) Glasses removal
Figure 1: Example results for our SPatchGAN and the base-lines. Our method generates natural looking hairstyle in
Figure 1a and Figure 1b, and suppresses the traces of glasses in Figure 1c. The improvements in shape deformation are highlighted with green circles. it less capable of dealing with complicated shape changes like selfie-to-anime. In such a case, the discriminative fea-tures for one area, e.g., the eyes of an anime face, can be very different from another area, e.g., the hair. Therefore, it becomes difficult to make an accurate and stable decision for every patch.
A related problem is that PatchGAN alone cannot guar-antee the stability of an unsupervised image translation net-work. Various constraints have been proposed to stabilize and improve the training process, including the cycle con-straints [37, 17] and the shared latent space assumptions
[20, 10]. The constraints are applied on the generator to help alleviate some typical problems such as mode collapse.
However, these methods often create a conflict between the interest of GANs and the additional constraints, resulting in incompletely translation. E.g., it is challenging to reshape the hair properly in Figure 1a and Figure 1b, and remove the traces of glasses in Figure 1c.
The above issues can be potentially solved if one can sta-bilize the discriminator itself instead of introducing more constraints on the generator. With this motivation, we pro-pose SPatchGAN, an improved multi-scale discriminator architecture which leverages the statistical features over patches. The network benefits from the stability and global view of statistical features at the low-level scales, and the strong discrimination capability at the high-level scales. All the scale levels are jointly optimized in a unified network.
With the improved discriminator, we are able to reduce the full cycle constraints to a weak form that only operates on the forward cycle and the low resolution images.
The experiments demonstrate that our method is superior to the existing state-of-the-art methods. The main contribu-tions are:
• Our novel discriminator architecture stabilizes the net-work by matching the distributions of the statistical features, and employing a shared backbone for the multiple scales.
• We propose a simplified framework that reduces the conflicts between GANs and the other constraints, and facilitates the shape deformation. 2.