Abstract
In this paper we propose a novel square root sliding-window bundle adjustment suitable for real-time odometry applications. The square root formulation pervades three major aspects of our optimization-based sliding-window estimator: for bundle adjustment we eliminate landmark variables with nullspace projection; to store the marginal-ization prior we employ a matrix square root of the Hes-sian; and when marginalizing old poses we avoid form-ing normal equations and update the square root prior di-rectly with a specialized QR decomposition. We show that the proposed square root marginalization is algebraically equivalent to the conventional use of Schur complement (SC) on the Hessian. Moreover, it elegantly deals with rank-deﬁcient Jacobians producing a prior equivalent to
SC with Moore–Penrose inverse. Our evaluation of visual and visual-inertial odometry on real-world datasets demon-strates that the proposed estimator is 36% faster than the baseline. It furthermore shows that in single precision, con-ventional Hessian-based marginalization leads to numeric failures and reduced accuracy. We analyse numeric proper-ties of the marginalization prior to explain why our square root form does not suffer from the same effect and therefore entails superior performance. 1.

Introduction
Figure 1. Top: estimated visual-inertial odometry trajectories on the eurocMH01 sequence. The conventional baseline VIO-64 works well with double-precision ﬂoats, but fails in single pre-cision (VIO-32). In contrast, the proposed square root estimator
√
VIO-32 even in single precision retains the same accuracy. It processes the whole sequence in 26 s on a desktop CPU (7.1x faster than real time). Bottom: smallest eigenvalue σmin of the marginalization prior Hessian Hm evolving over time (linear y-axis for |σmin| < 10−8, logarithmic elsewhere). We expect values close to zero (positive semi-deﬁnite Hessian with gauge freedom).
While the conventional (squared) formulation in single precision leads to negative eigenvalues with large magnitude, accumulating error, and (ultimately) numerical failure, the proposed square root approach has σmin of bounded magnitude and remains stable.
Visual odometry has been a key component in environ-ment mapping, robot navigation and autonomous systems for a long time. With low-cost devices, such as smartphones or robot vacuum cleaners becoming increasingly prevalent in our daily lives, we see a growing need to solve odometry problems in a fast and robust manner. In addition, scalable solutions on specialized hardware require algorithms to run with limited ﬂoating point precision.
To keep the system size bounded with a ﬁxed number
This work was supported by the ERC Advanced Grant SIMU-LACRON and by the German Science Foundation Grant CR 250/20-1
“Splitting Methods for 3D Reconstruction and SLAM”. of state variables over time, marginalization is a commonly used technique, where the remaining sub-problem can be interpreted in terms of a marginal distribution with the same solution as before. However, for the implementation of the marginalization prior as well as the solution of the as-sociated optimization problem, there are multiple options.
The Schur complement technique is an easy-to-implement choice that many state-of-the-art odometry and SLAM sys-tems employ, but it relies on the Hessian matrix of the lin-earized system. While this is not a problem in many ap-plications, the fact that the square of the Jacobian and thus a squared condition number are involved in SC may lead
to numerical instabilities. In Kalman ﬁlter literature, this has often been addressed by using a square root ﬁlter ap-proach [29]. Moreover, it has recently been shown that even in an optimization-based bundle adjustment setting, matrix square roots can be exploited to increase numerical stability [6]. Following up on these ﬁndings, we propose an optimization-based formulation of visual (inertial) odome-try that uses matrix square roots in the optimization stage as well as to store and update the marginalization prior.
VIO
We dub the two ﬂavors of our method for purely visual and visual-inertial odometry, respectively.
The contributions of our paper are as follows:
VO and
√
√
• We propose a novel square root formulation for optimization-based sliding-window estimators.
• One of the components of this square root formulation is a specialized QR decomposition and we prove the analytical equivalence with marginalization based on
SC and Cholesky decomposition.
• Our QR marginalization naturally includes the case of rank-deﬁcient Jacobians.
• The proposed square root formulation enables optimization-based VO and VIO with single-precision
ﬂoating point computations without loss of accuracy.
• On several real-world datasets, we systematically ana-lyze the effect of using nullspace projection combined with our specialized QR decomposition on runtime and accuracy. The proposed square root estimator is 23% faster than the baseline and 36% faster when ad-ditionally switching to single precision.
• We release our implementation as open source: https://go.vision.in.tum.de/rootvo. 2.