Abstract
This paper presents an explore-and-classify framework for structured architectural reconstruction from an aerial image. Starting from a potentially imperfect building re-construction by an existing algorithm, our approach 1) ex-plores the space of building models by modifying the re-construction via heuristic actions; 2) learns to classify the correctness of building models while generating classifica-tion labels based on the ground-truth; and 3) repeat. At test time, we iterate exploration and classification, seeking for a result with the best classification score. We evaluate the approach using initial reconstructions by two baselines and two state-of-the-art reconstruction algorithms. Qualitative and quantitative evaluations demonstrate that our approach consistently improves the reconstruction quality from every initial reconstruction. 1.

Introduction
Imagine a task of drawing to reconstruct the face of a person you met in the morning. This is a challenging task, where most people would perform trial and error, that is, iterate modifying and verifying the face reconstruction un-til being satisfied with the result.
In the space of struc-tured reconstruction, which is notoriously difficult even with the emergence of deep learning, researchers compete on designing effective neural architectures that directly re-constructs structured geometry (or its constituent informa-tion) [16, 22, 21, 24]. Our idea is to decompose the process of reconstruction into the iteration of trial and error, where the core learning is in verifying the correctness of a given geometry as opposed to one-shot geometry regression.
More concretely, the paper proposes a novel explore-and-classify approach for structured reconstruction. Start-ing from an imperfect building reconstruction by an exist-ing algorithm, our approach uses simple geometry-editing actions to explore a set of offspring graphs and learns to classify the correctness of them at different levels of local geometries. At test time, we iterate exploration and clas-sification with a search method such as beam-search or se-quential Monte Carlo [6], trying to find the result with the best classification score.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of the approach on the task of structured outdoor architecture reconstruction from an aerial image [18], where a building structure is repre-sented as a graph (See Fig. 1). We use two baselines and two state-of-the-art algorithms [22, 18] to generate the ini-tial reconstructions. Our system consistently makes big im-provements over all the initial reconstructions and achieves state-of-the-art performance.
In summary, the contributions of this paper are two-fold: 1) A novel explore-and-classify framework with local geometry classifiers for a structured reconstruction prob-lem; and 2) A state-of-the-art performance on outdoor ar-chitecture reconstruction problem with significant improve-ments over all the baselines and the best existing ap-1
proaches. While we focus on one problem setting, the ideas are potentially applicable to many other structured reconstruction tasks and could further improve the per-formance of their state-of-the-arts. Our code and pre-trained models are available at https://github.com/ zhangfuyang/search_evaluate. The data is pub-licly available through our prior project [18]. 2.