Abstract
Re-assembling multiple pots accurately from numerous 3D scanned fragments remains a challenging task to this date. Previous methods extract all potential matching pairs of pot sherds and considers them simultaneously to search for an optimal global pot configuration. In this work, we empirically show such global approach greatly suffers from false positive matches between sherds inflicted by indistinc-tive sharp fracture surfaces in pot fragments. To mitigate this problem, we take inspirations from the field of structure-from-motion (SfM), where many pipelines have matured in reconstructing a 3D scene from multiple images. Motivated by the success of the incremental approach in robust SfM, we present an efficient reassembly method for axially sym-metric pots based on iterative registration of one sherd at a time. Our method goes beyond replicating incremen-tal SfM and addresses indistinguishable false matches by embracing beam search to explore multitudes of registra-tion possibilities. Additionally, we utilize multiple roots in each step to allow simultaneous reassembly of multiple pots. The proposed approach shows above 80% reassem-bly accuracy on a dataset of real 80 fragments mixed from 5 pots, pushing the state-of-the-art and paving the way to-wards the goal of large-scale pot reassembly. Our code and preprocessed data is available at https://github.com/
SeongJong-Yoo/structure-from-sherds. 1.

Introduction
Ceramic pots are fundamental cultural relics in human history. Most of them are made on a spinning wheel, en-compassing axial symmetry. While they provide meaning-ful information to understanding ancestral lifestyles, many pots are excavated as broken pieces (known as sherds), ne-*Both authors contributed equally to this work.
†Co-corresponding authors
Figure 1. An illustration of 5 real pots simultaneously reassem-bled from 80 unclustered sherds (3D point clouds) using our pipeline. It can handle some degree of non-axially symmetric dec-orations on the pot surface as shown in pot C. Ground truth (manu-ally restored) pot images are shown above each reassembly result. cessitating accurate reassembly from these sherds for the purpose of recovering historical records.
Currently, the process of reassembly is relied upon ex-tensive manual efforts from restoration experts. Despite years of experience, however, reconstructing each pot can often require hours of concentration even for the qualified professionals as fragments are mixed from multiple pots.
Furthermore, pieces are fitted on a trial-and-error basis, po-tentially incurring undesired abrasions on the break surfaces of sherds. These motivate strong need for an efficient frame-work that can virtually reassemble axially symmetric pots.
Recent studies have proposed pipelines [18, 13] majorly comprising 3 stages, first extracting features from each pot sherd, second computing potential matches between each pair of sherds, and last performing global combinatorial optimization to deduce the most likely 3D pot configu-ration from these matches. These are known as global approaches since the last stage can be viewed as finding true positive sherd matches from the global pot configura-tion graph. Nevertheless, our effort of implementing such pipeline raises an inherent issue illustrated in Fig. 2, that a
Figure 2. The top row shows some exemplary false positive loops formed in pot A from Fig 1. (True configurations in green and false in red.) Some pairwise matches are difficult to detect even at the cycle level just by looking at the break lines and the axis profile curve (in white). The global method only succeeds when false positive matches are removed. Our incremental method with beam search outputs the correct result in spite of false matches. global method is sensitive to false positive matches between pot sherds as it directly derives each sherd’s configuration from these matches. Unfortunately, such false positives are widespread due to lack of distinctive features on the fracture surfaces as the result of sharply broken edges (see Fig. 3).
In addressing above issue, we turn our attention to structure-from-motion (SfM), which have enjoyed tremen-dous success over the last few decades in reconstructing 3D scenes from thousands of images [17, 1, 22, 16]. Behind this achievement lies the incremental method, which mains robustness to numerous false positive matches by iteratively registering one camera view at a time in descending order of connectivity. The essence of the incremental method lies in its ability to iteratively improve pairwise matches and discover initially undetected (false negative) matches as the model grows, which can be tricky for the global approaches that relies on pruning initial pairwise matches only.
A naturally following question is, can we apply the find-ings from incremental SfM to devise a reliable method for reassembling axially symmetric pots from fragments? As will be illustrated in Sec. 2.2, we find both tasks share a great deal of analogy in terms of the problem and (global) pipeline structures, potentially allowing a smooth transfer of the incremental method from the domain of SfM to pot reassembly. Yet, pot reassembly requires handling addi-tional challenges such as mitigating incorrect sherd regis-tration triggered by many indistinguishable false positive sherd matches (due to ambiguous geometric features) and enabling reassembly of multiple pot models.
To this end, we propose structure-from-sherds (SfS), an efficient incremental method for reassembling multiple pots from fragments. Our method follows the iterative sherd reg-istration scheme to grow the reassembly model like in in-cremental SfM, but some extensions are without which the (c) (b) (a)
Figure 3.
Illustration of some challenges in reassembling multi-ple axially symmetric pots. (a) shows sharp, thin fracture surfaces with little distinct features triggering false positive sherd matches. (b) shows the sparse nature of connectivity between sherds from the same pot (59% filled across 8 sherds of pot A in Table 2). (c) il-lustrates the noisy block-diagonal sparsity structure of the problem when sherds are mixed from different fragments (See Sec. 2.1). reassembly performance is limited (see Table 3). These in-clude adopting beam search to explore multiple registration possibilities in each step to compensate for indistinguish-able false matches, and employing multiple sherd roots in each beam state to reassemble multiple pots simultaneously.
Our main technical contributions are as follows:
+ a new pot reassembly pipeline derived from our uni-fication of structure-from-motion and pot reassembly (Sec. 2.2) and based on multi-root beam search, yield-ing more complete pots from more fragments [18],
+ a new axis-based geometric descriptor for the break line points, removing a need to use surface point cloud for efficient initial sherd matching(Sec. 3.4)
+ simple algorithms for extracting and utilizing rim, base and thickness to reduce false matches and further improve registration accuracy (Table 3), and
+ a new challenging dataset of 80 real pot sherds from 5 different pots made for evaluation (Table 2).
Conversely, our implementation has some limitations: currently, it requires at least part of the base fragment for each pot to be correctly reassembled (see Sec. 5.4). Also, we do not utilize fragment texture (like in [18]) because the 3D scanner often fails in stitching the texture correctly and suffers from light saturation. Nonetheless, we believe this work would serve as the basis for further improvements. 1.1.