Abstract
Recently, a novel retina-inspired camera, namely spike camera, has shown great potential for recording high-speed dynamic scenes. Unlike conventional digital cameras that compact the visual information within an exposure inter-val into a single snapshot, the spike camera continuously outputs binary spike streams to record the dynamic scenes, yielding a very high temporal resolution. Most of the ex-isting reconstruction methods for spike camera focus on re-constructing images with the same resolution as spike cam-era. However, as a trade-off of high temporal resolution, the spatial resolution of spike camera is limited, resulting in in-ferior details of the reconstruction. To address this issue, we develop a spike camera super-resolution framework, aim-ing to super resolve high-resolution intensity images from the low-resolution binary spike streams. Due to the relative motion between the camera and the objects to capture, the spikes ﬁred by the same sensor pixel no longer describes the same points in the external scene. In this paper, we ex-ploit the relative motion and derive the relationship between light intensity and each spike, so as to recover the external scene with both high temporal and high spatial resolution.
Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method can reconstruct pleasant high-resolution images from low-resolution spike streams. 1.

Introduction
With the development of real-time computer vision ap-plications, such as unmanned aerial vehicle, autonomous driving and robotics, the inherent limitations of conven-tional digital cameras become increasingly evident. Con-ventional cameras generally accumulate the photoelectric information in a certain exposure window to form a snap-shot frame. Such an imaging mechanism can produce clear images with ﬁne details for still scenes. However, for dy-*Ruiqin Xiong (rqxiong@pku.edu.cn) is the corresponding author. (a) Spike stream (b) TFP [34] (c) TFI [34] (d) TVS [35] (e) TVS [35] + SRFBN [13] (f) Proposed
Figure 1. The image for a doll falling from a height. (a) Spike streams captured by the spike camera [6]. (b)-(d) Spike cam-era reconstruction with different methods [34, 35], which suffers low resolution with poor details. (e) x2 super resolution result by combining the state-of-the-art spike camera reconstruction method
[35] with competitive image super-resolution method [13]. (f) x2 reconstruction by super-resolving the intensity image from spike streams with the proposed method, which can reconstruct the tex-tures and details. namic scenes with high speed motion, a single point on a moving object can be projected onto different pixels on the sensor, resulting in blurry artifacts for the moving objects.
To address this issue, a novel neuromorphic camera, namely spike camera, has been developed to record dy-namic scenes [6, 7]. Unlike the conventional cameras that capture the visual scene by a snapshot, the spike camera abandons the concept of exposure window. Instead, it mon-itors the incoming light persistently and ﬁres continuous spike streams to record dynamic scenes at very high tem-poral resolution. In addition, different from the bio-inspired event cameras that send events to record the relative light intensity changes, spike cameras ﬁre spikes to record the arrival of a very small amount of photons, which provides more explicit information for recovering the absolute inten-sity.
Despite the great potential of spike camera for captur-ing dynamic scenes, recovering high-quality images from binary spike streams still remains an important and chal-lenging issue, which has gained increasing attention in re-cent years [33–35]. Some works [33, 34] exploit the char-acteristics of spike streams and infer the instantaneous light intensity by estimating the ﬁring frequency of each pixel.
In addition, Zhu et al. [35] design retina-like visual image reconstruction frameworks to solve the problem. However, these methods mainly focus on suppressing the noises and blurry artifacts of reconstruction, ignoring the issue of low resolution.
In fact, as a trade-off of low latency and low power consumption, current spike cameras have a relatively low spatial resolution. To generate high resolution images, an intuitive approach is to combine the spike camera recon-struction methods with image super-resolution algorithms
[13, 16, 31, 32]. However, such pipelined schemes usually cannot achieve promising reconstruction, as the scene de-tails have already been lost in the ﬁrst reconstruction stage.
In this paper, we develop a novel image reconstruction framework to super-resolve high-quality intensity images from continuous spike streams. Due to the relative motion between the camera and the objects to capture, the spikes
ﬁred by the same sensor pixel no longer describes the same points in the external scene and each spike can be mapped to different locations in the scene. By exploiting the relative motion, we can recover the scene with a resolution much higher than that directly provided by the spike streams. To this end, we carefully analyze the working mechanism of spike camera. Based on the spike camera imaging principle, we formulate the relationship between the image intensity and each spike, so as to derive super-resolved intensity from the spike streams. The main contribution of this paper are summarized as follows:
• We present a super-resolution framework for spike camera. To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to super-resolve low-resolution (LR) spike streams to high-resolution (HR) intensity images.
• Instead of simply applying image super-resolution al-gorithms to LR reconstructions of spike camera, we derive the relationship between light intensity and each spike, so as to estimate pixel-wise super-resolved in-tensity from spike streams.
• Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method can reconstruct pleasant HR intensity images from LR binary spike streams and recover ﬁne details, which cannot be reconstructed with the state-of-the-art methods. 2.