Abstract
Recent advances in deep generative models have led to immense progress in 3D shape synthesis. While existing models are able to synthesize shapes represented as voxels, point-clouds, or implicit functions, these methods only indi-rectly enforce the plausibility of the ﬁnal 3D shape surface.
Here we present a 3D shape synthesis framework (SurfGen) that directly applies adversarial training to the object sur-face. Our approach uses a differentiable spherical projec-tion layer to capture and represent the explicit zero isosur-face of an implicit 3D generator as functions deﬁned on the unit sphere. By processing the spherical representation of 3D object surfaces with a spherical CNN in an adversarial setting, our generator can better learn the statistics of nat-ural shape surfaces. We evaluate our model on large-scale shape datasets, and demonstrate that the end-to-end trained model is capable of generating high ﬁdelity 3D shapes with diverse topology. 1.

Introduction
Shape generation is primarily concerned with the syn-thesis of diverse, realistic, and novel shapes. High ﬁdelity models of 3D shapes are key to creating immersive virtual worlds, and are important to many disciplines, including ar-chitecture, visual effects, and training robots in simulated navigation.
With the introduction of large scale 3D object datasets such as ShapeNet [6] and ModelNet [62], there has been signiﬁcant progress towards building generative models of 3D shapes. The predominant approach is to perform train-ing using representations that are straightforward for neural networks to work with, such as voxel grids, point clouds, or implicit functions. This is in contrast to the majority of graphics & simulation tasks, which require an triangle mesh representation of a shape. When learned in an adver-sarial setting, the discriminator in these frameworks only indirectly ensure the realism of the object surface.
A major barrier in training a neural network on object surfaces is the inherent irregularity and discrete nature of 3D surfaces. Different objects within the same object class can have vastly different topologies, and can be character-ized by different internal connectivity when represented as a triangle mesh. Our key insight is that a discriminator ap-plied to the surface should focus on the geometric properties
Figure 1. Examples of chairs with complex structure generated by our model trained on ShapeNet [6] chair class. of the surface (curvature, orientation, topology, etc.), while ignoring properties that are irrelevant to the shape. Here we propose to transform object surfaces to spherical maps computed with a differentiable function fM→S. A spherical map is a surface representation deﬁned on discrete samples from the surface of a sphere. The values at each pixel repre-sents a minimal distance of the object surface along a ray, as well as the surface occupancy along the ray. The spherical map is appealing because it is a singular representation that captures the surface geometry of a shape. Given a spherical map, we then utilize a network with spherical convolution layers to complete our discriminator.
We propose SurfGen, an end-to-end generative model of 3D shapes that is trained with a discriminator which op-erates on the explicit zero isosurface of an implicit shape function. We demonstrate that applying adversarial training on the surface of an object leads to generated highly real-istic shapes. This results in an approach that can generate high quality shapes with arbitrary topology and resolution.
Examples of shapes generated by our model are shown in
Figure 1.
In summary our contributions are three fold:
• We introduce a spherical projection operator that takes as input an explicit triangle mesh, and is fully differen-tiable w.r.t. the vertices.
• We propose SurfGen, an end-to-end differentiable 3D shape synthesis framework which applies an adversar-ial objective on the zero isosurface of the generator.
• We demonstrate our model can synthesize realistic, high quality shapes that have diverse topology.
2.