Abstract
We propose a method for the unsupervised recon-struction of a temporally-coherent sequence of surfaces from a sequence of time-evolving point clouds, yielding dense, semantically meaningful correspondences between all keyframes. We represent the reconstructed surface as an atlas, using a neural network. Using canonical corre-spondences defined via the atlas, we encourage the recon-struction to be as isometric as possible across frames, lead-ing to semantically-meaningful reconstruction. Through ex-periments and comparisons, we empirically show that our method achieves results that exceed that state of the art in the accuracy of unsupervised correspondences and accu-racy of surface reconstruction. 1.

Introduction
Applications such as UV-mapping, shape analysis, and partial scan-completion all rely on the availability of a surface representation that is coherent across different in-This work was partially carried out while the first author was an in-tern at Adobe Research and was supported in part by the Swiss National
Science Foundation. stances. Namely, the different surfaces should be in cor-respondence, such that each point on one surface maps to a point with the same semantic meaning on another.
In the literature, the most common way to achieve coher-ence consists of explicitly computing and establishing cor-respondences between non-coherent input representations, such as 3D meshes [49, 3, 45, 22, 16, 42] or 3D point clouds [24, 21]. This, however, assumes that the input data contains points that can be matched in a semantically-meaningful manner, and in fact only circumvents the true task of retrieving a coherent surface representation.
In this paper, we tackle this problem more directly by learning to reconstruct temporally-coherent surfaces from a sequence of 3D point clouds representing a shape deform-ing over time. To this end, we rely on the AtlasNet patch-based representation [19] to model the surface underlying the 3D points. However, whereas in the original AtlasNet, any patch can correspond to any part of the surface, we en-force consistency of the patch locations through the whole sequence effectively creating a time-consistent atlas.
To learn atlases that are semantically and temporally consistent, meaning that each 2D point on each 2D atlas patch models the same semantic surface point over time, we leverage differential geometry to require the correspon-dences model a close-to-isometric deformation, for which the metric tensor computed at any surface point remains constant as the shape changes. We translate this into a metric-consistency loss function, which, when minimized, implicitly establishes meaningful point correspondences.
Our approach does not require any ground-truth corre-spondences, which are usually difficult to obtain. Hence, it is unsupervised and can operate on any shape category without a known shape template. Yet, as shown in Fig. 1, it provides reliable correspondences even in cases in which the shapes are complex and the deformations are severe, un-like state-of-the-art methods which tend to break down. 2.