Abstract
Training vision-based Autonomous driving models is a challenging problem with enormous practical implications.
One of the main challenges is the requirement of storage and processing of vast volumes of (possibly redundant)
In this paper, we study the problem driving video data. of data-efficient training of autonomous driving systems.
We argue that in the context of an edge-device deploy-ment, multi-criteria online video frame subset selection is an appropriate technique for developing such frameworks.
We study existing convex optimization based solutions and show that they are unable to provide solution with high weightage to loss of selected video frames. We design a novel multi-criteria online subset selection algorithm, TM-COSS, which uses a thresholded concave function of selec-tion variables. Extensive experiments using driving simula-tor CARLA show that we are able to drop 80% of the frames, while succeeding to complete 100% of the episodes. We also show that TMCOSS improves performance on the cru-cial affordance “Relative Angle” during turns, on inclusion of bucket-specific relative angle loss (BL), leading to selec-tion of more frames in those parts. TMCOSS also achieves an 80% reduction in number of training video frames, on real-world videos from the standard BDD and Cityscapes datasets, for the tasks of drivable area segmentation, and semantic segmentation. 1.

Introduction
Many A.I.-based autonomous driving applications e.g. affordance-based driving models [21], semantic segmenta-tion models [5], drivable area detection [24], etc., need to collect a large amount of video data from edge devices for training machine learning models. However, much of the input video contains redundant information from the task point of view. For example, in the case of affordance-based driving models, training using many frames on straight road
Figure 1: Data subset selection framework on edge de-vices for reduced training dataset collection. sections may not be necessary; while one may need a lot of frames in the turns for training. In this paper, we are inter-ested in developing an online subset selection (OSS) algo-rithm [13] which can be deployed on edge devices, and can select the most informative video frames used for training one or more models. Figure 1 shows an overview of our application scenario.
The problem of video frame subset selection has been studied in various contexts, including video summarization
[13, 19], video recognition[23], video fast forwarding [17], etc. Deep reinforcement learning based methods, which learn a frame skipping network, with reward for better per-formance [17, 22], or more confidence [23] on the end task are infeasible for deployment on edge devices since they require multiple evaluations of the end task objective (e.g. error on a validation set or fraction of test episodes com-pleted), for learning the parameters of the skipping net-work. The external criteria based methods which optimize a global criterion between selected frames and whole video, e.g. perceptual similarity [13], manifold spanning [15], etc are appropriate for our setting, but do not incorporate sig-loss from the currently trained nals from A.I. tasks, e.g.
models. [12] ensures compatibility between the consecu-tive selected video segments through a Markov Model. The
OSS framework [13] was extended to incorporate pointwise loss of the selected frames in a composite criteria [9], and is the most appropriate for our setting.
In this paper, we build on the multi-criteria OSS frame-work (MCOSS) [9], where at each step, an existing set of se-lected frames is supplemented by the most relevant frames from an incoming set, based on the sum of total dissimilar-ity between selected frames and incoming frames, and the pointwise loss incurred by incoming selected frames. How-ever, through a rigorous analysis, we show that, additive incorporation of pointwise loss criteria in [9] suffers from selection of fewer frames from incoming set as we provide higher weightage to the pointwise criteria. This is due to the fact that additive incorporation suffers from multiple count-ing of loss of selected points thus leading to selection of fewer frames. We propose a novel thresholded MCOSS for-mulation (TMCOSS) which alleviates this problem while retaining the convexity of the optimization problem. We also propose SubMCOSS, which to the best of our knowl-edge, is the first submodular set function-based formulation for online subset selection incorporating pointwise criteria.
We evaluate the video frame selection performance of
TMCOSS using the autonomous driving simulator CARLA
[11] for the CAL driving model [21] task, as well as on real-world datasets of Berkeley Deep-drive (BDD) [24] for drivable area segmentation task and Cityscape dataset [8] for semantic segmentation tasks, using DeepLabv3+ model
[5].
For the CAL model task, we define a novel bucket-specific loss (BL) for the crucial relative angle affordance.
We show that TMCOSS along with bucket-specific loss (BL), called TMCOSS-BL, can achieve a 100:20 compres-sion (selecting 1 in 5 frames) while completing 10 out of 10 episodes in 4 different driving conditions, though models trained on data collected from MCOSS can can only com-plete 7 episodes for the same compression ratio. Empiri-cally, we also show that both on synthetic data, as well as data from selection of video frames for autonomous driving,
TMCOSS performs better than approximation algorithms for submodular maximization [1, 2] using SubMCOSS.
On the semantic segmentation task, TMCOSS achieves a 100:20 compression with a 1% decrease in overall mIoU score, while MCOSS suffers a decrease 8% in mIOU. Fi-nally, on drivable area segmentation task, we achieve a com-pression 100:20 with only 1% decrease mIoU, compared to 5% decrease for MCOSS. In all cases, datasets selected us-ing TMCOSS are more informative than any of the individ-ual criteria. To summarize, our main contributions are:
• We introduce the problem of designing data-efficient autonomous driving platforms, with a key challenge being multi-criteria OSS.
• We propose two novel multi-criteria OSS methods.
The convex relaxation based method, TMCOSS is the-oretically motivated and empirically superior to multi-ple recent state-of-the-art baselines.
• We propose a novel bucket specific relative angle loss (BL), which when used with TMCOSS (TMCOSS-BL), provide state-of-the-art compression on CAL driving model task. TMCOSS also demonstrates significant savings in training data requirements on benchmark real-world datasets. 1.1.