Abstract
ROP
The wide-angle lens gains increasing attention since it can capture a wide ﬁeld-of-view (FoV) scene. However, the obtained image is contaminated with radial distortion, mak-ing the scene not realistic. Previous distortion rectiﬁcation methods rectify the image in a rectangle or invagination, failing to display the complete content and regular shape si-multaneously. In this paper, we rethink the representation of rectiﬁcation results and present a Rectiﬁcation OutPainting (ROP) method, aiming to extrapolate the coherent seman-tics to the blank area and create a wider FoV beyond the original wide-angle lens. To address the speciﬁc challenges such as the variable painting region and curve boundary, a rectiﬁcation module is designed to rectify the image with geometry supervision, and the extrapolated results are gen-erated using a dual conditional expansion strategy. In terms of the spatially discounted correlation, a curve-aware cor-relation measurement is proposed to focus on the generated region to enforce the local consistency. To our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to tackle the challenging rectiﬁcation via outpainting, and our curve-aware strategy can reach a rec-tiﬁcation construction with complete content and regular shape. Extensive experiments well demonstrate the supe-riority of our ROP over other state-of-the-art solutions. 1.

Introduction
A wide-angle lens that can capture the wide ﬁeld-of-view (FoV) scene, gains increasing applications in recent years. Humans have the natural ability to rectify and un-derstand the distorted scene induced by a wide-angle lens.
For computer vision, accomplishing this task requires re-covering the realistic geometric distribution based on hand-crafted features [6, 8, 29, 14, 1, 26] or deep features
[23, 39, 18, 35, 17, 16, 5]. The existing distortion recti-ﬁcation methods generate the rectiﬁed image as rectangle
*Corresponding author
Rectified Image  (Invagination)
Outpainting 
Manner
Extrapolated 
Image
Wide-Angle 
Image
Shape 
Reference
Increased  22% FoV
Rectified Image  (Rectangle)
Figure 1. Motivation of the presented Rectiﬁcation OutPainting (ROP) method. ROP aims to combine the advantages of two tra-ditional rectiﬁcation constructions: complete content and regular shape, while gaining wider ﬁeld-of-view (FoV) beyond the origi-nal wide-angle lens. Note that the structure of the rectangle recti-ﬁed image is used as a shape reference for outpainting. or invagination, both of which have the limitations to dis-play the complete content and regular shape simultaneously.
For instance, the rectangle construction displays the recti-ﬁed scene in a regular shape, but it discards the content in the image boundary. Such a representation cannot provide the complete scene and weakens the advantage of the wide-angle lens. Although the invagination construction covers complete contents, it introduces an irregular shape with a visually narrow FoV. These two representations have their strengths and weaknesses. It would be appealing and mean-ingful if we contribute a representation combined with the complete content and regular shape in the meantime.
Given an incomplete image, the goal of the image ex-trapolation is to hallucinate plausible visual contents out-side the original boundaries [25, 31, 33, 37, 9, 34]. Dif-ferent with the actively studied inpainting [40, 41, 38, 12, 36, 13, 42, 43, 44], outpainting receives less attention and is more challenging due to its one-side constraint. In this paper, we rethink the traditional construction of distortion
rectiﬁcation and explore to establish a new representation using outpainting.
As shown in Fig. 1, we propose a Rectiﬁcation OutPaint-ing (ROP) method. Given a distorted image captured by a wide-angle lens, ROP aims to recover the realistic complete scene in the invagination form and construct a regular shape.
However, ROP is challenging due to the following charac-teristics: (1) Variable painting regions. For the rectiﬁca-tion result, the blank region surrounding the valid content is different in each image, owing to various degrees of distor-tions. (2) Curve boundary. In contrast to the straight bound-ary, our ROP extrapolates the coherent semantics and details from the curve boundary. This special structure causes a more complicated spatial correlation between the generated content and the original content.
To be speciﬁc, we design a parametric framework to ad-dress the aforementioned challenges. First, the distortion rectiﬁcation module rectiﬁes the input image in the form of invagination with general geometry supervision. Sub-sequently, the rectiﬁed image and the ﬁlling mask are fed into an outpainting module to extrapolate the semantically consistent content into the blank region using a dual condi-tional expansion strategy. Such a strategy considers both the global distribution and expanded content, guiding the net-work to perceive different ﬁlling regions explicitly. More-over, a curve-aware correlation measurement is presented to enforce the local consistency of the extrapolated content.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach can recover the realistic details from the distorted image, with a complete scene and regular shape. We also show that our
ROP method enables the captured scene to exhibit a wider
FoV beyond the original wide-angle lens, which allows for more accurate scene reasoning and other applications.
In general, our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We are the ﬁrst to propose a Rectiﬁcation OutPainting (ROP) method to eliminate the inherent limitations of traditional rectiﬁcation representations.
• A general geometry supervision and a dual conditional expansion strategy are designed to achieve accurate distortion rectiﬁcation and image outpainting.
[23, 39, 18, 35, 17, 16, 5]. For example, Kang et al. [14] leveraged the consistency of pairwise tracked point features in a sequence to self-calibrate the catadioptric camera. The curve-based methods [6, 8, 29, 1] predicted the distortion parameters in terms of the detected distorted lines and re-moved the distortion using the estimated parameters. On the other hand, learning methods expanded the distortion rectiﬁcation with deep features. For instance, the convo-lutional neural networks are used to extract the semantic features of distorted images and predict the distortion pa-rameters [23, 39, 35, 5]. To achieve the blind rectiﬁcation, the generation-based methods [18, 17, 16] employed the encoder-decoder architecture to rectify the distorted image, enables a ﬂexible paradigm of parameter-free rectiﬁcation.
Despite the encouraging performance achieved by the above methods, the construction of rectiﬁcation results has the limitations of displaying a complete content and regular shape simultaneously. In this work, we would like to draw attention from the precise rectiﬁcation performance to the few concerned representations of rectiﬁcation results.
Image Completion: Image completion targets reconstruct-ing missing parts in damaged images, of which the image inpainting technique gains well explored. Prior works in in-painting can be classiﬁed into traditional methods [2, 4, 3, 27] and learning methods [40, 38, 12, 36, 42, 43, 44]. Im-age outpainting is more challenging than inpainting due to the one-side constraint. For the ﬁrst time, Sabini et al. [25] achieved the deep learning-based outpainting with the pow-erful generation ability of the generative adversarial net-works. The feature expansion module and content predic-tion module are proposed to improve the outpainting per-formance gradually in [33]. Teterwak et al.
[31] condi-tioned the discriminator with pre-trained features from In-ceptionV3 network, which enables the outpainting image to match the ground truth in the semantics space. Guo et al. [9] designed a spiral generative network to conduct the image extrapolation following the perception fashion of humans.
Thanks to the above methods’ promising efforts, we get a meaningful inspiration and investigate to utilize the out-painting technique to construct a novel representation for the distortion rectiﬁcation result.
• To address the spatially discounted correlation, a curve-aware correlation measurement is proposed to enforce the local consistency of extrapolation results. 3. Methodology 3.1. Problem Formulation 2.