Abstract
In this work, we address the problem of unsupervised domain adaptation for person re-ID where annotations are available for the source domain but not for target. Previous methods typically follow a two-stage optimization pipeline, where the network is ﬁrst pre-trained on source and then
ﬁne-tuned on target with pseudo labels created by feature clustering. Such methods sustain two main limitations. (1)
The label noise may hinder the learning of discriminative features for recognizing target classes. (2) The domain gap may hinder knowledge transferring from source to target.
We propose three types of technical schemes to alleviate these issues. First, we propose a cluster-wise contrastive learning algorithm (CCL) by iterative optimization of fea-ture learning and cluster reﬁnery to learn noise-tolerant representations in the unsupervised manner. Second, we adopt a progressive domain adaptation (PDA) strategy to gradually mitigate the domain gap between source and tar-get data. Third, we propose Fourier augmentation (FA) for further maximizing the class separability of re-ID models by imposing extra constraints in the Fourier space. We observe that these proposed schemes are capable of facilitating the learning of discriminative feature representations. Exper-iments demonstrate that our method consistently achieves notable improvements over the state-of-the-art unsupervised re-ID methods on multiple benchmarks, e.g., surpassing
MMT largely by 8.1%, 9.9%, 11.4% and 11.1% mAP on the Market-to-Duke, Duke-to-Market, Market-to-MSMT and
Duke-to-MSMT tasks, respectively.
*Corresponding author
Figure 1. Given labeled source data and unlabeled target data, our goal is to learn feature representations for recognizing target classes.
For this unsupervised domain adaptation task, we propose three technical schemes to learn discriminative target features: (a) cluster-wise contrastive learning, (b) progressive domain adaptation (c)
Fourier augmentation. 1.

Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation (re-ID) is an important task in intelligent surveillance, which aims at identifying the per-son across different camera views. Recent person re-ID methods have achieved impressive performance owing to the advancement of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
[52, 67, 51, 31, 6, 88, 27]. However, the success is mainly at-tributed to supervised learning over massive human-labeled data. The need of time-consuming manual annotations sub-stantially limits the scalability of re-ID models. Besides, directly applying a pre-trained re-ID model to other new domains may cause signiﬁcant performance drop due to the inherent data distribution shift across different surveillance cameras. Recently, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)
has thus attracted much attention to adapt the model learned on a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain.
Prior unsupervised re-ID methods typically rely on iterative training with pseudo labels generated by clustering algo-rithms on the target domain [79, 70, 17, 35]. These existing methods have shown promising results but still sustain two main limitations. (1) The label noise may mislead an unex-pected optimization direction for network training with the unlabeled target data. (2) The knowledge (i.e. the model abil-ity of distinguishing person identities) learned on source can not be sufﬁciently transferred to target by simply ﬁne-tuning the source model.
To alleviate these problems, we investigate three aspects to facilitating the learning of discriminative feature represen-tations for better recognizing target classes by (1) reducing the label noise on the unlabeled target data, (2) better trans-ferring knowledge learned from source to target, and (3) adding extra training constraints. Accordingly, we propose a uniﬁed framework to achieve these goals. First, inspired by the recent contrastive learning algorithm for unsuper-vised visual representation learning [21, 8, 66], we propose a cluster-wise contrastive learning algorithm to learn noise-tolerant representations on the unlabeled target data (Figure 1 (a)). Speciﬁcally, we construct a momentum-based moving-average (MMA) feature encoder and build a dynamic queue to provide sufﬁcient negative samples across multiple mini-batches for training. Unlike the instance-wise supervision
[21, 8, 66], we incorporate cluster-wise supervision gen-erated by clustering, which is amenable for the high-level re-ID task. Our contrastive learning and feature clustering is performed in an alternating way so that the noise of pseudo labels can be largely reduced. Second, most of existing methods apply a two-stage training process in which the network is ﬁrst pre-trained on source and then ﬁne-tuned on target. Instead of directly ﬁne-tuning, we adopt a collabo-rative learning mechanism on both domains with a shared feature encoder (Figure 1 (b)). By gradually decreasing the training weights on source and increasing weights on target, we can better transfer the model ability of distinguishing person identities from source to target. Third, we propose to impose extra constraints in the Fourier space for maximizing the class separability of re-ID models (Figure 1 (c)). We view the amplitude spectrum feature as a kind of nonlinear transformations and compute additional loss functions (e.g, cross-entropy loss) to augment training. In summary, with the proposed method, we can learn better discriminative fea-ture representations and further improve the state-of-the-art performance of unsupervised re-ID.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows. (1) We propose a cluster-wise contrastive learning algorithm to learn noise-tolerant feature representations on the unlabeled target data. The label noise can be largely reduced in the iterative optimization procedure of feature clustering and learning. (2) We propose a progressive do-main adaptation strategy to gradually transfer the knowledge learned by the labeled source domain into the unlabeled tar-get domain for unsupervised re-ID. (3) We propose to impose
Fourier constraints to further maximize the class separability of the model. We observe the frequency spectrum features can be complementary to the spatial features and beneﬁ-cial for improving the re-ID performance. (4) Empirical evaluations demonstrate that our method consistently outper-forms prior state-of-the-art methods on multiple benchmarks by a large margin. Particularly, using the same ResNet-50 backbone, we surpass MMT [17] by 8.1%, 9.9%, 11.4% and 11.1% mAP on the Market-to-Duke, Duke-to-Market,
Market-to-MSMT and Duke-to-MSMT tasks, respectively. 2.