Abstract
Visual tracking has achieved considerable progress in re-cent years. However, current research in the ﬁeld mainly fo-cuses on tracking of opaque objects, while little attention is paid to transparent object tracking. In this paper, we make the ﬁrst attempt in exploring this problem by proposing a
Transparent Object Tracking Benchmark (TOTB). Speciﬁ-cally, TOTB consists of 225 videos (86K frames) from 15 di-verse transparent object categories. Each sequence is man-ually labeled with axis-aligned bounding boxes. To the best of our knowledge, TOTB is the ﬁrst benchmark dedicated to transparent object tracking. In order to understand how ex-isting trackers perform and to provide comparison for future research on TOTB, we extensively evaluate 25 state-of-the-art tracking algorithms. The evaluation results exhibit that more efforts are needed to improve transparent object track-ing. Besides, we observe some nontrivial ﬁndings from the evaluation that are discrepant with some common beliefs in opaque object tracking. For example, we ﬁnd that deeper features are not always good for improvements. Moreover, to encourage future research, we introduce a novel tracker, named TransATOM, which leverages transparency features for tracking and surpasses all 25 evaluated approaches by a large margin. By releasing TOTB, we expect to facilitate fu-ture research and application of transparent object tracking in both the academia and industry. The TOTB and evalua-tion results as well as TransATOM are available at https:
//hengfan2010.github.io/projects/TOTB/. 1.

Introduction
Object tracking is one of the most fundamental problems in computer vision and serves as an important component in numerous applications [37, 50, 60, 36] including robotics,
∗The three authors make equal contributions.
†Corresponding author.
Figure 1. Opaque object tracking (a) and transparent object track-ing (b). Compared with opaque object tracking in which target object appearance is more distinguishable from background and consistent over time, tracking of transparent target is more chal-lenging as transparent object appearance is heavily dependent on background. All ﬁgures in this paper are best viewed in color and by zooming in. human-machine interaction, video analysis and understand-ing, etc. In recent decades, the tracking community has wit-nessed remarkable progress. Numerous tracking algorithms have been proposed and signiﬁcantly pushed the state-of-the-arts. Nevertheless, existing research in the ﬁeld mainly focuses on opaque object tracking, while very little attention is paid to tracking of transparent objects.
Transparent objects (e.g., bottle, cup, bulb, jar and many others made by glass and plastics) are common to see in the real world. Many of them are closely related to human daily life, and tracking of them are crucial for robotic vision and human-machine interaction. For example, a robot may need to know the trajectory of a transparent object in human hand for better action understanding.
Compared with tracking of opaque objects, transparent object tracking is more challenging. Because of the par-ticular transparency feature, the appearances of transparent objects are relatively weak and largely mixed with the sur-rounding background image (see Figure 1 for an example).
As a result, it becomes more difﬁcult to directly leverage appearance information to distinguish the target object from background. In addition, when a target object moves, even slowly, its appearance may change drastically due to back-ground variation, making transparent object tracking harder.
Besides the above technical difﬁculty, another more im-portant reason that transparent object tracking is untouched is because of lack of a benchmark. Benchmark is crucial for the advancement of tracking. It allows researchers to objec-tively evaluate and compare their methods as well as design new algorithms for improvement. Currently, there exist var-ious benchmarks (e.g., [57, 45, 20, 47, 54, 30, 14, 25, 42]) for opaque object tracking. However, there is no benchmark for transparent object tracking. Although some of bench-marks (e.g., [14, 39]) consist of sequences of transparent objects, they are limited in both number of videos (e.g., less than 10) and object classes (e.g., at most two categories).
To facilitate research on transparent object tracking, a dedi-cated dataset is desired to serve as the testbed for fair eval-uation and comparison. 1.1. Contribution
In this work, we make the ﬁrst attempt in exploring trans-parent object tracking by introducing a Transparent Object
Tracking benchmark (TOTB), which is our major contribu-tion. TOTB comprises of a diverse selection of 15 com-mon transparent object classes with each containing 15 se-quences.
In total, TOTB consists of 225 sequences with 87K frames. Each sequence is manually annotated with axis-align bounding boxes and labeled with different at-tributes. To our best knowledge, TOTB is the ﬁrst bench-mark dedicated to the task of transparent object tracking.
Figure 4 demonstrates several example sequences in TOTB.
Besides, in order to understand how existing tracking al-gorithms perform and to provide comparisons for future re-search on TOTB, we extensively evaluate 25 state-of-the-art trackers. We conduct in-depth analysis on the evalu-ation results and observe several surprising ﬁndings that are discrepant with some popular beliefs in the opaque object tracking. For example, it is widely believed that deeper features are crucial to improve tracking perfor-mance, as shown in the existing opaque tracking bench-marks (e.g., [57, 14, 47, 25]). Contrary to this, it turns out that deeper features do not always bring performance gains for transparent object tracking. Instead, it may heavily de-crease accuracy. These observations provide better under-standing of transparent object tracking and guidance for fu-ture improvements. tracker by exploiting transparency features for tracking. In particular, considering that transparency is a common at-tribute of transparent objects, its feature should be generic and transferable for all transparent instances, and also dis-tinguishable from opaque objects. To this end, we train a deep network to learn such transparency feature and ap-ply it for tracking by integrating it into ATOM [8]. Our new tracker, dubbed TransATOM, is assessed on TOTB and signiﬁcantly outperforms all evaluated algorithms by a large margin. Note that, although TransATOM is simple, it demonstrates the effectiveness of transparency feature in boosting performance. We expect it to provide a reference for facilitating future study.
In summary, we make the following contributions: (1) We propose TOTB, which is, to the best of knowledge, the
ﬁrst benchmark dedicated for transparent object tracking. (2) To assess existing trackers and provide comparisons, we evaluate 25 tracking algorithms with in-depth analysis. (3) We introduce a novel transparent object tracker, named
TransATOM, to encourage further research on TOTB.
By releasing TOTB, we hope to facilitate future research and application of transparent object tracking.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We discuss related works of this paper in Section 2. Section 3 details the proposed TOTB. Section 4 introduces our proposed tracker
TransATOM. Evaluation results are shown in Section 5 with in-depth analysis, followed by conclusion in Section 6. 2.