Abstract
With the development of deep convolutional neural net-works, image matting has ushered in a new phase. Regard-ing the nature of image matting, most researches have fo-cused on solutions for transition regions. However, we ar-gue that many existing approaches are excessively focused on transition-dominant local fields and ignored the inher-ent coordination between global information and transi-In this paper, we propose the Tripar-tion optimisation. tite Information Mining and Integration Network (TIMI-Net) to harmonize the coordination between global and lo-cal attributes formally. Specifically, we resort to a novel 3-branch encoder to accomplish comprehensive mining of the input information, which can supplement the neglected coordination between global and local fields. In order to achieve effective and complete interaction between such multi-branches information, we develop the Tripartite In-*Joint first authors.
†Joint corresponding authors. Project page: https://wukaoliu.github.io/TIMI-Net. formation Integration (T I 2) Module to transform and inte-grate the interconnections between the different branches.
In addition, we built a large-scale human matting dataset (Human-2K) to advance human image matting, which con-sists of 2100 high-precision human images (2000 images for training and 100 images for test). Finally, we con-duct extensive experiments to prove the performance of our proposed TIMI-Net, which demonstrates that our method performs favourably against the SOTA approaches on the alphamatting.com (Rank First), Composition-1K (MSE-0.006, Grad-11.5), Distinctions-646 and our Human-2K.
Also, we have developed an online evaluation website to perform natural image matting. 1.

Introduction
The digital matting is one of the important tasks in com-puter vision, which aims to accurately estimate the opacity of foreground objects in images and video sequences.
It has a wide range of applications, particularly in the fields of
film production and digital image editing. Formally, the in-put image is modeled as a linear combination of foreground and background colours [41], as shown below: mation can be employed to guide the propagation of local information, thus facilitating the coordination of the both.
Our major contributions can be summarized as follows:
Ii = αiFi + (1 − αi)Bi, αi ∈ [0, 1] (1) where αi ∈ [0, 1] denotes the opacity at pixel i in the input image, Fi and Bi refer to the Foreground (Fg) and Back-ground (Bg) colour. The problem is highly ill-posed. As for a pixel in a typical 3-channel (e.g. RGB) image, 7 unknown values (i.e. 3 F , 3 B and 1 alpha) need to be solved, but there are only 3 known quantities (3 I).
To solve the problem, the classical methods [7, 23, 46, 52] utilized trimap as a kind of constraint information to reduce the solution space. The trimap consists of three parts, white, black, and gray, representing the foreground, background and transition regions, separately. Many meth-ods [2, 6, 31, 38, 43, 62] attempted to go about predict-ing alpha mattes without auxiliary cues. Although they can produce promising results, the gap between real-world and synthetic images remains and can be magnified due to com-posited artefacts, which can lead to inferior generalisation.
Typically, almost all trimap-based methods [56, 34, 49, 3, 17] perform transition optimisation explicitly by concate-nating RGB images and trimap to feed the network. Other trimap-free methods [6, 62, 31] construct some transition variants (pseudo-trimap) implicitly with the assistance of loss functions to guide local region optimisation. However, within the constraints of the transition, these approaches fo-cus excessively on local regions, which may neglect the co-ordination between global and local attributes (e.g. texture similarity, location correlation, etc.), thus leading to incom-plete information mining.
In this paper, we propose a Tripartite Information Mining and Integration Network (TIMI-Net) that can capture suffi-cient global information by mining and integrating multi-modal information from RGB and Trimap. As for informa-tion mining, we consider that features from different modal-ities have complementary global information. RGB images can provide detailed low-level appearance (e.g. texture and colour similarity), while high-level positional relevance (se-mantics, shape, etc.) can be found in trimap. Therefore, we construct two functionally specific units (termed RGB unit and Trimap unit) to perform separate mining.
Regarding the information integration, we can intu-itively add or concatenate features from multi-branches like
[17, 62]. However, this would lead to incomplete inte-gration due to the differentiated characteristics of different types of global information and initial local information. To combine them effectively, inspired by Non-Local [53], we have developed a Tripartite Information Integration (T I 2) module that transforms and integrates two streams of bi-lateral relations RGB-Trimap branch and RGB-Unit, RGB-Trimap branch and Trimap-Unit. In this way, global infor-• We propose a Tripartite Information Mining and In-tegration Network (TIMI-Net) with a Tripartite In-formation Integration (T I 2) module for image mat-ting, which can sufficiently mine and integrate com-plementary global information from the RGB image and trimap.
• We build a large-scale human matting dataset with 2,000 training images and 100 test images. To the best of our knowledge, this is the largest high-accuracy hu-man image matting dataset. We will open it to the pub-lic to advance the human image matting task.
• Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
TIMI-Net can achieve SOTA performance on syn-thetic and real-world images, which proves the effec-tiveness and superiority of the proposed method. 2.