Abstract
Few-shot object detection (FSOD) aims to strengthen the performance of novel object detection with few labeled sam-ples. To alleviate the constraint of few samples, enhancing the generalization ability of learned features for novel ob-jects plays a key role. Thus, the feature learning process of
FSOD should focus more on intrinsical object characteris-tics, which are invariant under different visual changes and therefore are helpful for feature generalization. Unlike pre-vious attempts of the meta-learning paradigm, in this paper, we explore how to enhance object features with intrinsical characteristics that are universal across different object cat-egories. We propose a new prototype, namely universal pro-totype, that is learned from all object categories. Besides the advantage of characterizing invariant characteristics, the universal prototypes alleviate the impact of unbalanced object categories. After enhancing object features with the universal prototypes, we impose a consistency loss to max-imize the agreement between the enhanced features and the original ones, which is beneﬁcial for learning invari-ant object characteristics. Thus, we develop a new frame-work of few-shot object detection with universal prototypes (F SODup) that owns the merit of feature generalization towards novel objects. Experimental results on PASCAL
VOC and MS COCO show the effectiveness of F SODup.
Particularly, for the 1-shot case of VOC Split2, F SODup outperforms the baseline by 6.8% in terms of mAP. 1.

Introduction
Recently, owing to the success of deep learning, great progress has been made on object detection [26, 11, 14, 12].
However, the outstanding performance [25, 21, 3, 18] de-pends on abundant annotated objects in training images for each category. As a challenging task, few-shot object detec-∗Corresponding author
Figure 1. Universal prototypes (colorful stars) are learned from all object categories, which are not speciﬁc to certain object cat-egories. Universal prototypes capture different intrinsical object characteristics via latent projection, e.g., the prototype (cid:70) incorpo-rates object characteristics of ‘car’ and ‘motorbike’. tion (FSOD) [16, 35] mainly aims to improve the detection performance for novel objects that belong to certain cate-gories but appear rarely in the annotated training images.
The main challenge of FSOD lies in how to learn gen-eralized object features from both abundant samples in base categories and few samples in novel categories, which can simultaneously describe invariant object characteristics and alleviate the impact of unbalanced categories. Re-cently, meta-learning strategy [28, 30, 9] has been uti-lized in [38, 37, 35, 8] to adapt representation ability from base object categories to novel categories. However, the weak performance compared to basic ﬁne-tuning methods
[33, 36, 4, 5] shows the meta-learning technique fails to im-prove the generalization ability of object feature learning.
One possible reason is that the adaptation process in meta-learning mechanism could not capture the invariant characteristics across categories sufﬁciently. The invari-ance, i.e., invariant under different visual changes like tex-tual variances or environmental noises, is always associated with the intrinsical object characteristics. As demonstrated in [23], the models that could extract invariant representa-tions often generalize better than their non-invariant coun-terparts. Therefore, in this paper, we explore how to en-hance the generalization ability of object feature learning with the invariant object characteristics.
We devise universal prototypes (as shown in Fig. 1) to learn the invariant object characteristics. Different from the prototypes that are separately learned from each category
[28, 20, 32], the proposed universal prototypes are learned from all object categories. The beneﬁts are two-fold. On the one hand, prototypes from all categories capture rich in-formation not only from different object categories but also from contexts of images. On the other hand, the univer-sal prototypes reduce the impact of data-imbalance across different categories. Moreover, via ﬁne-tuning, the uni-versal prototypes can be effectively adapted to data-scarce novel categories. To this end, we develop a new frame-work of few-shot object detection with universal prototypes (F SODup). Particularly, we utilize a soft-attention of the learned universal prototypes to enhance the object features.
Such a universal-prototype enhancement (i.e., each element of the enhanced features is a combination of prototypes) aims to simultaneously improve invariance and retain the semantic information of original object features. Here we employ a consistency loss to enable the maximum agree-ment between the enhanced and original object features.
During training, we ﬁrst train the model on data-abundant base categories. Then, the model is ﬁne-tuned on a re-constructed training set that contains a small number of balanced training samples from both base and novel object categories. Experimental results on two benchmarks and extensive visualization analyses demonstrate the effective-ness of the proposed method. Our code will be available at https://github.com/AmingWu/UP-FSOD.
The contributions are summarized as follows: (1) Towards FSOD, we devise a dedicated prototype and a new framework with universal-prototype enhancenment. (2) We successfully demonstrate that, after ﬁne-tuning with universal-prototype enhanced features, object detec-tors effectively adapt to novel categories. (3) We obtain new performance on PASCAL VOC [7, 6] and MS COCO [19]. Enhancing invariance and generaliza-tion with the learned universal prototypes is empirically ver-iﬁed. Moreover, extensive visualization analyses also show that universal prototypes are capable of enhancing object characteristics, which is beneﬁcial for FSOD. 2.