Abstract
During the last years, convolutional neural networks (C-NNs) have triumphed over video quality assessment (VQA) tasks. However, CNN-based approaches heavily rely on annotated data which are typically not available in VQA, leading to the difﬁculty of model generalization. Recent ad-vances in domain adaptation technique makes it possible to adapt models trained on source data to unlabeled target data. However, due to the distortion diversity and content variation of the collected videos, the intrinsic subjectivi-ty of VQA tasks hampers the adaptation performance. In this work, we propose a curriculum-style unsupervised do-main adaptation to handle the cross-domain no-reference
VQA problem. The proposed approach could be divided into two stages.
In the ﬁrst stage, we conduct an adap-tation between source and target domains to predict the rating distribution for target samples, which can better re-veal the subjective nature of VQA. From this adaptation, we split the data in target domain into conﬁdent and un-certain subdomains using the proposed uncertainty-based ranking function, through measuring their prediction conﬁ-dences. In the second stage, by regarding samples in con-ﬁdent subdomain as the easy tasks in the curriculum, a
ﬁne-level adaptation is conducted between two subdomain-s to ﬁne-tune the prediction model. Extensive experimen-tal results on benchmark datasets highlight the superiori-ty of the proposed method over the competing methods in both accuracy and speed. The source code is released at https://github.com/cpf0079/UCDA. 1.

Introduction
Beneﬁtting from the evolution of affordable and reli-able consumer capture devices, and the tremendous pop-ularity of social media platforms, recent years have wit-nessed an explosion of user-generated videos shared and streamed over the Internet [8]. Improving the efﬁciency of
∗Corresponding author
Figure 1. The pipeline of the proposed model could be divided into two stages, i) the model ﬁrst learns domain-invariant features from labeled source data and unlabeled target data; ii) supervised by the pseudo labels obtained from the ﬁrst stage, the performances of those uncertain predictions are rectiﬁed through the adaptation between two subdomains in the target domain. video coding, storage, and streaming over communication networks is a principle goal of video sharing and stream-ing platforms. One relevant research direction is the per-ceptual optimization of rate-distortion tradeoffs in video encoding and streaming, where distortion (or quality) is usually modeled using video quality assessment (VQA) al-gorithms that can predict human judgements of perceptu-al quality. This has motivated years of research on the topics of perceptual image and video quality assessment (IQA/VQA) [48, 36, 13, 22, 23, 12].
Compared to the most reliable subjective VQA study re-lying on manual annotating, objective approach that auto-matically predicts the visual quality of distorted videos has long been a popular topic in VQA community. More re-cently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have become a hallmark backbone model to solve vision-related tasks.
Despite of the impressive progress in developing objective
VQA models, they often encounter challenges in practi-cal applications, where prediction model trained on well-labeled data could be easily crippled given the target sam-ples due to the domain disparity [21, 11]. This is because benchmark VQA datasets are usually biased to speciﬁc en-vironments, and in practice, it is often hard to acquire new training sets that fully cover the huge variability of real-life test scenarios. Admittedly, generalizing models learned on one visual domain to novel domains has been a major ob-stacle to the development of VQA techniques.
A natural idea to improve the generalization ability of the trained model is to adopt domain adaptation technique that is invented to handle the cross-domain tasks by learn-ing domain-invariant representations.
It has experienced an impressive series of successes in many computer vision tasks such as semantic segmentation, classiﬁcation and de-tection [31, 41], but remains a challenge for the particular task of VQA due to the subjective nature of quality assess-ment. Since videos collected from the testing scenario are bound to have diverse distortions and varied visual contents, part of them tend to be more difﬁcult to be rated than other-s [25]. This leads to different difﬁculty degrees for the net-work to learn transferable knowledge for each target sam-ple, resulting in uncertain predictions and inferior adapta-tion performance (Figure 1, where we assume that predic-tions with more concentrated distributions, which show uni-modal patterns, have higher prediction conﬁdences as men-tioned in [25]).
The conventional wisdom of objective VQA methods is learning a regression model to predict the mean-opinion-score (MOS). However, the subjective nature of quality as-sessment progress may not be adequately represented by a single scalar number, considering such a scheme ignores the fact that the video to be evaluated would receive divergen-t opinions from different subjects [44]. This is particular-ly profound on complex, real-world distorted videos com-pared to their image counterparts. For instance, the average standard deviation of the subjective scores of the videos in the LIVE-VQC database [34] is 18 on the MOS scale of
[0,100].
In this case, we argue that one possible way to better reveal this intrinsic subjectivity may reside in explor-ing the potentially useful and predictive information con-tained in the distributions of subjective scores, which has been rarely discussed or utilized in the literature.
In light of the above issues, in this paper, by casting the quality assessment task as a rating distribution predic-tion problem, we take steps toward a novel domain adap-tation approach, dubbed as Unsupervised Curriculum Do-main Adaptation (UCDA), to handle the cross-domain no-reference VQA task. The proposed curriculum-style adap-tation could be performed in two stages as shown in Fig-ure 1. In the ﬁrst stage, feature distributions between the labeled source data and unlabeled target data are aligned to produce the prediction for target samples. Then, the tar-get domain data is further split into two subdomains based on the their prediction conﬁdences. In the second stage, a
ﬁne-level adaptation is further conducted between two sub-domains in a self-supervised manner, aiming to improve the performance of those uncertain predictions in target data by enforcing high prediction conﬁdence. The contributions of this work could be summarized with the following points:
• We propose a novel unsupervised domain adaptation approach for no-reference VQA task, where the rating distribution is used as the predict target to better reveal the intrinsic subjectivity of the quality assessment. To our best knowledge, this is an earlier attempt to ex-plicitly highlight the transferable knowledge for VQA across different domains.
• We develop an uncertainty-based ranking function to sort the samples from target domain into different sub-domains based on their prediction conﬁdences, which are used to construct easy/hard tasks in the curriculum.
• We build a two-stage adversarial adaptation to improve the adaptation performance based on the designed cur-riculum. This is enabled by enforcing high prediction conﬁdence on those uncertain predictions. 2.