Abstract
To improve the generalization of detectors, for domain adaptive object detection (DAOD), recent advances mainly explore aligning feature-level distributions between the source and single-target domain, which may neglect the im-pact of domain-speciﬁc information existing in the aligned features. Towards DAOD, it is important to extract domain-invariant object representations. To this end, in this pa-per, we try to disentangle domain-invariant representations from domain-speciﬁc representations. And we propose a novel disentangled method based on vector decomposition.
Firstly, an extractor is devised to separate domain-invariant representations from the input, which are used for extract-ing object proposals. Secondly, domain-speciﬁc represen-tations are introduced as the differences between the input and domain-invariant representations. Through the differ-ence operation, the gap between the domain-speciﬁc and domain-invariant representations is enlarged, which pro-motes domain-invariant representations to contain more domain-irrelevant information. In the experiment, we sep-arately evaluate our method on the single- and compound-target case. For the single-target case, experimental results of four domain-shift scenes show our method obtains a sig-niﬁcant performance gain over baseline methods. More-over, for the compound-target case (i.e., the target is a com-pound of two different domains without domain labels), our method outperforms baseline methods by around 4%, which demonstrates the effectiveness of our method. 1.

Introduction
Though object detection has achieved many advances
[27, 9, 42, 19, 26, 21], when the training and test data are from different domains, these methods usually suffer
∗Equal contributions
†Corresponding author
Figure 1. To further verify the proposed method, we construct two new adaptive scenes with different weather conditions. from poor generalization. To this end, the task of domain adaptive object detection (DAOD) [4] has been proposed, in which a domain gap always exists between the train-ing/source and test/target domain, e.g., different weather conditions (as shown in Fig. 1).
To address DAOD, many methods [31, 18, 35, 46] ex-plored to reduce the domain gap by aligning the feature-level distribution of the source and single-target domain, which may neglect the impact of the domain-speciﬁc infor-mation existing in the aligned features. Towards DAOD, it is important to obtain domain-invariant representations (DIR), which is a bridge to alleviate the domain-shift im-pact and can help extract domain-invariant object features.
In this paper, we focus on extracting DIR. We explore to employ disentangled representation learning (DRL) [1, 24] to disentangle DIR from domain-speciﬁc representations (DSR). As a method of feature decomposition, the pur-pose of DRL is to uncover a set of independent factors that give rise to the current observation [6]. And these fac-tors should contain all the information in the observation.
Inspired by the idea, we explore to utilize DRL to solve
DAOD and propose a novel disentangled method to extract
Figure 2. Two examples of vector decomposition. (a) is the case (b) is the case of of two components (i.e.,
−−→
OC). Here, all these three components (i.e., components are kept orthogonal.
−−→
OD =
−−→
OD =
−→
OA +
−−→
OB +
−→
OA +
−−→
OB).
DIR. Particularly, we cast DRL into a process of vector de-composition. Vector decomposition is the general process of breaking one vector into two or more vectors that add up to the original vector, which is similar in spirit to the process of disentanglement [13]. Thus we consider employing the idea of vector decomposition to conduct disentanglement.
Concretely, given a feature map extracted by a backbone, an extractor consisting of multiple convolutional layers is devised to separate DIR from the feature map. Next, we take the difference between the feature map and DIR as
DSR. Meanwhile, a domain classiﬁer is used to help DSR contain much more domain-speciﬁc information. Besides, one key-step of disentanglement is to keep DIR and DSR independent. In this paper, we enhance independence via a constraint of vector orthogonalization between the DIR and
DSR. Finally, a region proposal network (RPN) is utilized to extract object proposals from DIR. Moreover, since the pro-posed method is a new feature decomposition mechanism, we should design a proper optimization to obtain DIR. To this end, based on the purpose of DRL, we break DRL into two sequential training steps, i.e., the step of feature decom-position aiming at learning disentanglement, and the step of feature orthogonalization aiming at promoting DIR and
DSR to be independent. The two-step optimization could promote our model learns feature decomposition, which is beneﬁcial for extracting DIR for DAOD.
In the experiment, we ﬁrst evaluate our method on the single-target case. Next, we evaluate our method on the compound-target case [23], i.e., the target is a compound of two different domains without domain labels. The signif-icant performance gain over baselines shows the effective-ness of our disentangled method. Our code will be available at https://github.com/AmingWu/VDD-DAOD.
The contributions are summarized as follows: (1) Different from traditional disentanglement, we present a vector-decomposed disentanglement, which does not rely on the reconstruction operation to ensure the de-composed components contain all the information of input. (2) Based on vector-decomposed disentanglement, we
Figure 3. Comparisons between the traditional method and our vector-decomposed method. Given an input I, traditional disen-tanglement usually employs two extractors F and G to disentan-gle V1 and V2. And V1 and V2 should be kept independent. To promote V1 and V2 to contain all the information of I, a recon-struction operation is usually employed. Here, the red arrow indi-cates the reconstruction operation. For vector-decomposed disen-tanglement, it only uses an extractor to decompose V1. The dif-ference between I and V1 is taken as V2. Meanwhile, V1 and V2 are kept orthogonal. Besides, vector-decomposed disentanglement does not need to utilize the reconstruction operation to promote V1 and V2 to contain all the information of I. design a new framework to solve DAOD. Meanwhile, we design a two-step training strategy to optimize our model. (3) In the experiment, our method is separately evaluated on the single- and compound-target cases. And we build two new adaptive scenes (see Fig. 1), i.e., Daytime-sunny
→ Dusk-rainy and Daytime-sunny → Night-rainy, to fur-ther verify our method. The signiﬁcant performance gain over baselines shows the effectiveness of our method. 2.