Abstract
Hough voting, as has been demonstrated in VoteNet, is effective for 3D object detection, where voting is a key step.
In this paper, we propose a novel VoteNet-based 3D detector with vote enhancement to improve the detection accuracy in cluttered indoor scenes. It addresses the limitations of current voting schemes, i.e., votes from neighboring objects and background have signiﬁcant negative impacts. Before voting, we replace the classic MLP with the proposed At-tentive MLP (AMLP) in the backbone network to get better feature description of seed points. During voting, we design a new vote attraction loss (VALoss) to enforce vote centers to locate closely and compactly to the corresponding object centers. After voting, we then devise a vote weighting mod-ule to integrate the foreground/background prediction into the vote aggregation process to enhance the capability of the original VoteNet to handle noise from background vot-ing. The three proposed strategies all contribute to more effective voting and improved performance, resulting in a novel 3D object detector, termed VENet. Experiments show that our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods on benchmark datasets. Ablation studies demonstrate the ef-fectiveness of the proposed components. 1.

Introduction 3D object detection is an active research topic in com-puter vision with a wide range of applications, such as autonomous driving [29], robotic manipulation [39] and high-level semantic SLAM (Simultaneous Localization and
Mapping) [45]. However, locating and classifying objects from scanned 3D point clouds in cluttered indoor scenes is still a challenging problem, without color information in particular. Although many efforts have been made to im-prove its performance over past few years [44, 32, 2, 27, 42], driven by the success of deep learning techniques, the per-*Corresponding author: wjun@nuaa.edu.cn seed point enhanced seed object center foreground vote background vote adjacent vote
Noise vote seed voting vote aggregation
Voting enhancement 1
Before voting 2
During voting 3
After voting seed enhancement vote attraction vote weighting proposal feature t e
N e t o
V
) a (
) s r u
O ( t e
N
E
V
) b ( proposal feature
Figure 1. Comparison with VoteNet. (b) Our ap-proach. Our approach enhances the voting procedure from three aspects (i.e., seed enhancement, vote attraction and vote weight-ing) to get better proposal features. (a) VoteNet. formance is still far from being satisfactory.
Recently, a deep Hough voting network, VoteNet [28], was proposed to detect 3D objects directly from scanned point clouds, and has achieved signiﬁcant improvements on several benchmark datasets. This method ﬁrst samples seed points from the whole point cloud, and then extracts high-dimensional features of these seed points using Point-Net++ [30]. Then, inspired by Hough voting in 2D object detection, these seed points produce vote centers based on the extracted features. The voting process is formulated as center point regression and implemented via MLP (Multi-Layer Perceptron). These votes are then clustered and ag-gregated to generate object proposal features, which are used to classify objects and regress their locations. Voting, as the essence in VoteNet, plays a vital role in information aggregation for object detection.
However, there are two disturbing factors in voting using the current VoteNet architecture, i.e., object-noise: votes from adjacent objects, and background-noise: votes from background seed points. As shown in Figure 1, VoteNet will choose a vote as the cluster center, and then aggregate information with no difference from all the votes within the bounding sphere to form the aggregated feature for the cen-   
object center foreground vote background vote vote aggregation patch input vote_loss = 0.35 attra_loss = 0.38 (a) Vote attraction vote_loss = 0.33 attra_loss = 0.15 input without vote weighting (b) Vote weighting with vote weighting
Figure 2. Motivation of the proposed (a) vote attraction loss and (b) vote weighting. (a) The original vote loss could make votes locate loosely around the object center, while our attraction loss increases the compactness of these votes. (b) Foreground prediction can make the detector re-weight votes during vote aggregation to suppress the impact of background noisy votes. ter. However, since the objects in indoor scenes are highly cluttered and close to each other, this simple clustering strat-egy may include votes from other adjacent objects. More-over, as VoteNet does not apply any constraints or penalty to votes from background seed points, these background votes may also be included in the subsequent vote aggregation.
In addition to the two disturbing factors, the voting effec-tiveness also highly depends on the seed point features. We argue that the classic MLP features, which merely depend on the last layer of MLP, lack information from the former layers, leading to loss of useful information.
As a solution, in this work we propose VENet (Vot-ing Enhancement Network), a 3D object detector based on
VoteNet. VENet improves the voting procedure in all the three stages (i.e., before, during and after), by enhancing feature description of seed points and handling noisy votes from both adjacent objects and background patches. Specif-ically, before voting, we ﬁrst propose an Attentive MLP (AMLP) to enhance seed point feature description by adap-tively considering multi-layer information in classic MLP.
Then, during voting, to relieve the negative impact of votes from adjacent objects, we expect the votes not only to be close to their ground truth centers, but also to be close to each other if they belong to the same object, as illustrated in
Figure 2(a). We thus design a novel loss function for seed point voting, called vote attraction loss, to decrease the in-ternal distances between votes associated with the same ob-ject centers. The increased compactness reduces the possi-bility of gathering information from adjacent objects, i.e., the object-noise. Lastly, after voting, to reduce the impact of meaningless and misleading votes from background seed points, we propose to predict foreground probability of seed points, and weight their votes accordingly during aggrega-tion. That is, we expect votes from seed points with higher foreground probabilities to contribute more during vote ag-gregation. As illustrated in Figure 2(b), this strategy can suppress the negative impact of background votes, i.e., the background-noise.
The contributions of the work can be summarized as:
• We propose a voting enhancement architecture to im-prove the voting procedure for Hough voting-based 3D object detection from point clouds, which obtains new state-of-the-art performance on public datasets.
• Before voting, we introduce an AMLP (Attentive
MLP) to enhance the feature encoding of seed points.
• During voting, we design a vote attraction loss (VA-Loss) to enforce votes to locate compactly and closely to the corresponding object centers.
• After voting, we present a vote weighting module to integrate foreground seed point prediction into the vote aggregation to reduce background noise. 2.