Abstract
In structure-from-motion the viewing graph is a graph where vertices correspond to cameras and edges represent fundamental matrices. We provide a new formulation and an algorithm for establishing whether a viewing graph is solvable, i.e. it uniquely determines a set of projective cam-eras. Known theoretical conditions either do not fully char-acterize the solvability of all viewing graphs, or are ex-ceedingly hard to compute for they involve solving a system of polynomial equations with a large number of unknowns.
The main result of this paper is a method for reducing the number of unknowns by exploiting the cycle consistency. We advance the understanding of the solvability by (i) finish-ing the classification of all previously undecided minimal graphs up to 9 nodes, (ii) extending the practical solvability testing up to minimal graphs with up to 90 nodes, and (iii) definitely answering an open research question by showing that the finite solvability is not equivalent to the solvability.
Finally, we present an experiment on real data showing that unsolvable graphs are appearing in practical situations. 1.

Introduction
Solving structure-from-motion is important, e.g., for 3D re-construction from images [33, 34, 29], image matching [26] and visual odometry and localization [22, 1, 28, 35]. The basic problem in structure-from-motion is to determine which image sets can be reconstructed. This can be done, e.g., by analyzing the viewing graph.
The viewing graph [19] (also known as the epipolar graph) of a set of images is a graph where vertices cor-respond to cameras/images and edges correspond to fun-damental matrices. In other terms, an edge is present be-tween two vertices if and only if the fundamental matrix between such image pair is available, meaning that there ex-ist enough corresponding points. In most practical scenar-ios such graph is not complete due to the fact that different cameras may view different portions of the scene.
A relevant question is whether a viewing graph is solv-able, i.e., if it uniquely determines a projective configura-Figure 1: Viewing graphs with eight vertices that were left unde-cided in [37] and that we determined to be solvable. tion of cameras, up to a single projective transformation.
In other terms, for a non-solvable viewing graph there exist multiple transformations that can be applied to the cameras without affecting the fundamental matrices. An equivalent definition of solvability is given in [19], stating that a graph is solvable if and only if the available fundamental matrices uniquely determine the remaining ones, i.e., the input graph can be transformed into the complete graph.
The solvability is closely related to 3D reconstruction (see Tab. 1), since viewing graphs are used by a class of projective structure-from-motion methods [30, 16] that re-cover the projective cameras starting from multiple funda-mental matrices. The solvability of a viewing graph should be assessed before addressing the reconstruction, since if a problem is non-solvable, then no method based on funda-mental matrices only will provide a useful reconstruction.
Considering calibrated cameras, i.e. using the essen-tial matrices instead of the fundamental ones, the solvable graphs are exactly those that are parallel rigid [24, 38]. The topic of parallel rigidity (also known as bearing rigidity) has been extensively studied in the literature (see [3] for a recent survey). Here we focus on the uncalibrated scenario, which has been much less understood.