Abstract
Most existing human matting algorithms tried to sepa-rate pure human-only foreground from the background. In this paper, we propose a Virtual Multi-modality Foreground
Matting (VMFM) method to learn human-object interactive foreground (human and objects interacted with him or her) from a raw RGB image. The VMFM method requires no additional inputs, e.g. trimap or known background. We reformulate foreground matting as a self-supervised multi-modality problem: factor each input image into estimated depth map, segmentation mask, and interaction heatmap us-ing three auto-encoders. In order to fully utilize the charac-teristics of each modality, we first train a dual encoder-to-decoder network to estimate the same alpha matte. Then we introduce a self-supervised method: Complementary
Learning(CL) to predict deviation probability map and ex-change reliable gradients across modalities without label.
We conducted extensive experiments to analyze the effec-tiveness of each modality and the significance of different components in complementary learning. We demonstrate that our model outperforms the state-of-the-art methods. 1.

Introduction
Matting is known as a chroma keying process to separate the foreground from a single image or video stream and then composite it with a new background. It has long been ap-plied in photography and special-effect film-making [33].
Due to the rapid development of deep neural network in computer vision, automatic matting becomes increasingly matured [7, 20, 23, 29, 33, 35]. However, most existing deep learning matting methods extract pure human fore-ground under controlled settings.
We revisit the matting problem with the following three beliefs. First, we argue that foreground matting algorithm should be able to handle situations when humans are in-teracting with objects. Currently, most of human matting algorithms [6, 7, 20, 22, 23, 29, 35] only focus on the body region while ignoring the object interacting with the per-Figure 1: Given challenging human-interactive images, one of the recent state-of-the-art foreground matting approach