Abstract
Discrete point cloud objects lack sufﬁcient shape de-scriptors of 3D geometries.
In this paper, we present a novel method for aggregating hypothetical curves in point clouds. Sequences of connected points (curves) are initially grouped by taking guided walks in the point clouds, and then subsequently aggregated back to augment their point-wise features. We provide an effective implementation of the proposed aggregation strategy including a novel curve grouping operator followed by a curve aggregation opera-tor. Our method was benchmarked on several point cloud analysis tasks where we achieved the state-of-the-art clas-siﬁcation accuracy of 94.2% on the ModelNet40 classiﬁca-tion task, instance IoU of 86.8% on the ShapeNetPart seg-mentation task and cosine error of 0.11 on the ModelNet40 normal estimation task. Our project page with source code is available at: https://curvenet.github.io/. 1.

Introduction
The point cloud is a primary data structure in a string of indoor/outdoor computer vision applications. A large vari-ety of 3D sensors (e.g. LiDAR sensors) are now able to cap-ture real-world objects, and their projections to digital forms can be made by sampling discrete points on the surface.
To reach a better understanding of the 3D targets, effective point cloud analysis techniques and methods are in great de-mand. With the thriving of deep learning, the pioneer works
[27, 29] and their followers [21, 6, 44, 1, 43, 7, 18, 48] pro-cessed point clouds through well-designed neural networks to learn the latent mappings between input point coordinates and the ground truth labels. Differing from conventional 2D vision tasks, the points are usually in irregular and un-ordered forms, hence, effective design of feature aggrega-tion and message passing schemes among point clouds still remains challenging.
Local feature aggregation is a basic operation that has been widely studied recently. For each key point, its neigh-borhood point features are ﬁrst grouped by pre-deﬁned rules
Figure 1. Common aggregations and the curve aggregation.
Blue circles denote key points, orange circles denote query points or query range. In curve aggregation, query features will be aggre-gated into all points. (e.g. KNN). The relative position encodings between the query point and neighboring points will be computed sub-sequently and then passed into various point-based trans-formation and aggregation modules for local feature ex-traction. Although the above operations help depict local patterns to some extent, long-range point relations are ne-glected. While the non-local module [35] provides a solu-tion to aggregate global features, we argue that the global point-to-point mapping might still be insufﬁcient to extract underlying patterns implied by the point cloud shapes.
To this end, we propose to improve the point cloud ge-ometry learning through generating continuous sequences of point segments. We posit that such continuous descrip-tors are more adequate for depicting the geometry of point cloud objects, compared to popular existing local and non-local operators nowadays. We denote such continuous de-scriptors as curves. By regarding a point cloud as an undi-rected graph, where the discrete points serve as the graph nodes and the neighbor point connections as the graph edges, a curve can therefore be described as a walk in the graph. Figure 1 intuitively compares the local aggregation, non-local aggregation, and our curve aggregation operators.
In this paper, we ﬁrst revisit the local feature aggregation in its general form and provide in-depth discussions on why long-range feature aggregation strategies are desired (Sec. 3.1). We then formulate our method formally by deﬁning the curve grouping policy (Sec. 3.2) and the aggregation be-tween curve features and point features (Sec. 3.3). A novel
point cloud processing network, CurveNet, is constructed by integrating the proposed modules along with several ba-sic building blocks into a ResNet [4] style network.
Our main contributions are three-fold: (1) We propose a novel feature aggregation paradigm for point cloud shape analysis. Sequences of points (curves) are grouped and aggregated for better depiction of point cloud object ge-ometries. A novel curve grouping operator along with a curve aggregation operator are proposed to achieve curve feature propagation. (2) We study potential drawbacks of grouping loops and provide our solutions to alleviate them.
Moreover, a dynamic encoding strategy is proposed so that curves can contain richer information while suppressing po-tential crossovers. (3) We embed the curve modules into a network named CurveNet, which achieves state-of-the-art results on the object classiﬁcation, normal estimation, and object part segmentation tasks. 2.