Abstract
This work addresses the problem of discovering, in an unsupervised manner, interpretable paths in the latent space of pretrained GANs, so as to provide an intuitive and easy way of controlling the underlying generative factors.
In doing so, it addresses some of the limitations of the state-of-the-art works, namely, a) that they discover directions that are independent of the latent code, i.e., paths that are linear, and b) that their evaluation relies either on visual inspection or on laborious human labeling. More speciﬁ-cally, we propose to learn non-linear warpings on the la-tent space, each one parametrized by a set of RBF-based latent space warping functions, and where each warping gives rise to a family of non-linear paths via the gradient of the function. Building on the work of [34], that discov-ers linear paths, we optimize the trainable parameters of the set of RBFs, so as that images that are generated by codes along different paths, are easily distinguishable by a discriminator network. This leads to easily distinguishable image transformations, such as pose and facial expressions in facial images. We show that linear paths can be derived as a special case of our method, and show experimentally that non-linear paths in the latent space lead to steeper, more disentangled and interpretable changes in the image space than in state-of-the art methods, both qualitatively and quantitatively. We make the code and the pretrained models publicly available at: https://github.com/ chi0tzp/WarpedGANSpace. 1.

Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [10] have emerged as the leading generative learning paradigm, ex-hibiting clear superiority in terms of the quality of generated realistic and aesthetically pleasing images [25, 3, 17, 18, 19]. However, despite their generative efﬁciency, GANs do not provide an inherent way of comprehending or control-ling the underlying generative factors. To address this, the research community has directed its efforts towards study-(a) (b)
Figure 1: (a) Warpings of vector space Rd due to two RBF functions, f i and f j, lead to different non-linear paths in Rd for any given z ∈ Rd (dashed bold lines) via their gradients,
∇f i and ∇f j. Solid black lines represent isohypses of the warpings and the colored vectors represent the vector ﬁelds induced by their gradients. (b) Illustration of a non-linear path due to warping f j, starting from a latent code z and moving along the gradient ∇f j by steps of magnitude (cid:15). ing the structure of GAN’s latent space [28, 30, 18, 33, 7, 37, 1, 34, 35, 9, 14, 32, 26, 11]. These works study the struc-ture of GAN’s latent space and attempt to ﬁnd interpretable directions on it; that is, directions sampling across which are expected to generate images where only a few (ideally one) factors of variations are “activated”. Meaningful human-interpretable directions can refer to either domain-speciﬁc 1
factors (e.g., facial expressions [28]) or domain-agnostic factors (e.g., zoom scale [14, 26, 32]).
Several methods adopt a supervised learning framework, and discover directions in the latent space that align well to factors controlled by supervision. In this line of research,
[31, 9, 18] supervision is in the form of labels assigned to the generated images, either by explicit human annota-tion, or by the use of pretrained semantic classiﬁers. Recent works, such as [32, 14, 26], steer the directions in the latent space so as to align well with controllable manipulations in the image space (e.g., zoom). Those works are limited by the fact that the factors are assumed to be known and by practical issues in generating the supervisory signals.
Another line of research imposes unsupervised con-straints in the directions in the latent space. GANSpace [11] performs PCA on deep features at the early layers of the generator and ﬁnds directions in the latent space that best map to those deep PCA vectors, arriving at a set of non-orthogonal directions in the latent space. Similarly to other methods, this is a very demanding training process that re-quires drawing large numbers of random latent codes and regressing the latent directions. Similarly, Voynov and
Babenko [34] proposed an unsupervised method to discover linear interpretable latent space directions. While the un-supervised learning framework has interest, current works make the hard assumption that the discovered directions are isotropic in the latent space, leading to linear paths. Further-more, despite the fact that these works lead to more com-plex directions, compared to methods that do not use any optimization at all (e.g., [14, 32]), the evaluation of the ob-tained results are either left to subjective visual inspection (e.g., [11]) or relies on laborious human labeling [34].
In this work, we propose to learn non-linear warping functions on the latent space, each one parametrized by a set of RBF-based latent space warping operations, and where each warping function f k gives rise to a family of non-linear paths via its gradient. More precisely, at each latent code z ∈ Rd, the gradient of the warping function
∇f k(z) gives the direction along the k-th family of paths – clearly, the gradient of f k is not isotropic in Rd, giving rise to non-linear paths. An example is shown in Fig. 1, where two RBF-warping functions, f i and f j, are depicted together with two distinct non-linear paths. Building on the work of [34], that discovers linear paths, we optimize the trainable parameters of the RBFs, so as that images that are generated by codes along paths of different families, f k, are easily distinguishable by a discriminator network (Fig. 2) – this leads to easily distinguishable image trans-formations, such as pose and facial expressions in facial im-ages (Fig. 1b). We show that [34], which learns linear paths, can be derived as a special case of our method and we per-form extensive comparisons with state-of-the art methods both qualitatively and quantitatively.
For a quantitative evaluation, we propose to utilize trained classiﬁers that assign attributes to the generated im-ages and propose a framework that monitors the correlation between paths in the latent space, and the corresponding changes/paths in the attribute space so as to determine how correlated are paths along certain warping functions to cer-tain attributes. We experimentally show that the proposed non-linear paths in the latent space lead to more disentan-gled and more interpretable changes in the image space than in state-of-the art methods. In addition, we show that for paths of the same length in the latent space, our method is able to produce much larger changes in the attribute space in comparison to the linear one, i.e., the generated attribute paths are much more steep, and that we are able to generate larger attribute changes before the quality of the generated images deteriorates.
The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:
• We propose an unsupervised and model-agnostic method for discovering non-linear interpretable paths on the latent space of pretrained GANs by using RBF-based warping functions. We derive the case of linear paths as a special case and learn a set of such warping functions so that the corresponding image transforma-tions are distinguishable to each other.
• We propose a quantitative evaluation protocol for mea-suring the interpretability/disentanglement of paths in the latent space, by analysing the corresponding changes to attributes in the generated images, as those are measured by pretrained semantic classiﬁers (e.g., pretrained face attribute networks).
• We apply our method to four pretrained GANs (i.e.,
SN-GAN [25], BigGAN [3], ProgGAN [17], and
StyleGAN2 [19]) and compare our non-linear paths to linear ones [34, 11], both qualitatively and quantita-tively. We show that in comparison to state-of-the-art, our method produces steeper, more disentangled, and longer paths in the attribute space. 2.