Abstract
Caricature is an artistic representation that deliberately exaggerates the distinctive features of a human face to con-vey humor or sarcasm. However, reconstructing a 3D cari-cature from a 2D caricature image remains a challenging task, mostly due to the lack of data. We propose to ﬁll this gap by introducing 3DCaricShop, the ﬁrst large-scale 3D caricature dataset that contains 2000 high-quality di-versiﬁed 3D caricatures manually crafted by professional artists. 3DCaricShop also provides rich annotations in-cluding a paired 2D caricature image, camera parame-ters and 3D facial landmarks. To demonstrate the ad-vantage of 3DCaricShop, we present a novel baseline ap-proach for single-view 3D caricature reconstruction. To ensure a faithful reconstruction with plausible face defor-mations, we propose to connect the good ends of the detail-rich implicit functions and the parametric mesh represen-tations. In particular, we ﬁrst register a template mesh to the output of the implicit generator and iteratively project the registration result onto a pre-trained PCA space to re-solve artifacts and self-intersections. To deal with the large deformation during non-rigid registration, we propose a novel view-collaborative graph convolution network (VC-GCN) to extract key points from the implicit mesh for ac-curate alignment. Our method is able to generate high-ﬁdelity 3D caricature in a pre-deﬁned mesh topology that is animation-ready. Extensive experiments have been con-ducted on 3DCaricShop to verify the signiﬁcance of the database and the effectiveness of the proposed method. We will release 3DCaricShop upon publication. 1.

Introduction
A caricature is a vivid art form of depicting persons by abstracting or exaggerating the peculiarities of the facial features. As a way to convey humor or sarcasm, caricatures
*Corresponding email: hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn
†Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
Figure 1: Left: the proposed 3DCaricShop, a large-scale repository of 3D caricatures that are manually crafted by professional artists.
It’s richly annotated with 2D carica-ture images, camera parameters, and 3D facial landmarks.
Right: the proposed baseline method that sets the new state of the art in single-view 3D caricature reconstruction. are widely used in entertainment, social events, electronic games and a variety of artistic creations. While 2D carica-tures have gained popularity in comic graphics, there exist many scenarios, including cartoon character creation, game avatar customization, custom-made 3D printing, etc., that the 3D face caricatures remain the mainstream representa-tions. However, creating a high-quality 3D caricature is a labor-intensive and time-consuming task even for a skilled artist. Thereby, generating expressive 3D face caricatures from a minimal input, such as a single image, is a highly-demanding but also challenging task.
Most of the prior works mainly focus on 2D caricature generation [6, 33, 16], while research on reconstructing 3D caricatures from 2D caricature images remains vary rare.
Wu et al. [39] propose the ﬁrst work that creates 3D carica-ture from 2D caricature images using an optimization based approach. They formulate caricature generation as a prob-lem of deforming the standard 3D face. In particular, they 10236
build a intrinsic deformation space based on the exaggerated morphable models of standard faces [25]. The deforma-tion coefﬁcients are then optimized to reduce the landmark
ﬁtting errors. Recently, in their follow-up work [42], they employ CNN to automate the task of 2D facial landmark prediction and deformation regression. However, previous works [32, 18] have shown that the traditional 3D mor-phable models (3DMM) of normal faces have very limited expressiveness in modeling the intricate facial deformations in reality. Thereby, the deformation space based on a syn-thetically exaggerated 3DMM, as proposed in [39, 42], is far from sufﬁcient to capture realistic 3D caricatures, which are even more diversiﬁed and complex than normal faces.
The key to tackling the above problem is a high-quality 3D caricature dataset created by artists that can provide real-istic shape priors for both learning-based and optimization-based approaches. However, there exist two challenges in constructing such a dataset. First, the 3D models crafted by artists are not topologically consistent, making it infea-sible to many downstream applications, including blend-shape creation, face animation, 3D landmark localization, etc. Secondly, the manually created meshes are typically not aligned with the corresponding images. While many face reconstruction techniques require an accurate registra-tion, such misalignment makes the dataset inapplicable to projection-based applications such as landmark ﬁtting, tex-ture restoration and manipulation, etc.
In this work, we introduce 3DCaricShop, a large-scale 3D caricature dataset that simultaneously addresses the above issues. First of all, 3DCaricShop contains 2,000 highly diversiﬁed and high-quality 3D caricature models manually crafted by professional artists. It is constructed by requesting artists to create 3D caricatures according to 2,000 manually selected caricature images from Web-Caricature [15], that span a wide range of shape exag-gerations and texturing styles. Compared to the synthetic datasets [13, 42], 3DCaricShop can provide shape priors for 3D caricatures with much higher ﬁdelity. Secondly, all the 3D models in 3DCaricShop have been re-topologized to a consistent mesh topology that paves the way to a num-ber of future applications, including learning a paramet-ric shape space, batch geometry processing, etc. Thirdly, we provide accurate 3D face landmarks in 3DCaricShop, which facilitates the use of landmark ﬁtting technique that is widely adopted in the state-of-the-art face reconstruc-tion approaches. Last but not least, 3DCaricShop offers a paired 2D caricature image and the camera parameters that are used for mesh alignment. This enables a wide range of techniques, such as differentiable rendering, landmark ﬁt-ting, etc., that rely on 2D-to-3D consistency. implicit functions [14, 24] have shown promising capability of modeling objects with arbitrary topologies,it is prone to artifacts and self-intersections when applied to reconstruct 3D caricatures, which typically contain many extreme dis-tortions. Though approaches using parametric mesh model can ensure a generation of plausible 3D face, they strug-gle to produce realistic faces with accurate geometry. We advocate to connect the good ends of both worlds by trans-ferring the high-ﬁdelity geometry learnt from the implicit reconstruction to a template mesh with a reasonable topol-ogy. To enable a faithful transfer, we propose a novel view-collaborative graph convolution network (VC-GCN) to ex-tract key points from the implicit mesh for accurate mesh alignment. To strike a balance between accuracy and ro-bustness, we iteratively project the registered template mesh onto a pre-trained PCA space using 3DCaricShop to avoid overﬁtting to outliers. Our approach is able to generate high-quality 3D caricatures in a pre-deﬁned mesh topology that is animation-ready.
We have conducted extensive benchmarking and abla-tion analysis on the proposed dataset. Experimental results show that the proposed approach trained on 3DCaricShop sets new state of the art on the task of single-view 3D cari-cature reconstruction from caricature images. 2.