Abstract
Hyperspectral photoacoustic (HSPA) spectroscopy is an emerging bi-modal imaging technology that is able to show the wavelength-dependent absorption distribution of the in-terior of a 3D volume. However, HSPA devices have to scan an object exhaustively in the spatial and spectral domains; and the acquired data tend to suffer from complex noise.
This time-consuming scanning process and noise severely affects the usability of HSPA. It is therefore critical to exam-ine the feasibility of 4D HSPA data restoration from an in-complete and noisy observation. In this work, we present a data reliability analysis for the depth and spectral domain.
On the basis of this analysis, we explore the inherent data correlations and develop a restoration algorithm to recover 4D HSPA cubes. Experiments on real data verify that the proposed method achieves satisfactory restoration results. 1.

Introduction
Discovered in 1880 [4], the photoacoustic (PA) effect is a phenomenon in which materials emit acoustic signals un-der light irradiation. In the last few decades, photoacous-tic imaging (PAI) [32] has emerged as a 3D imaging tech-nology that combines light and ultrasound to form images.
It has the advantages of both optical imaging (high optical contrast) and ultrasonic imaging (better penetration capa-bility) [33] and thus is an alternative to X-ray exposure as a way to visualize the interiors of objects in a noninvasive manner. PAI uses light as an excitation source and an ultra-sound sensor to detect sound waves generated by the opti-cally excited targets. It can be used to analyze the properties and interior structure of a 3D volume [32, 33, 34, 37].
Thanks to the evolution of wavelength-tunable lasers, multispectral or hyperspectral photoacoustic (HSPA) imag-ing techniques have been developed. HSPA irradiates the material with different wavelengths of light and provides 4D data cubes, e.g. a 3D volume for each wavelength, as shown in Fig. 1. The amount of light absorbed by the ma-terial is determined by the spectral absorption coefﬁcient of
Figure 1. 4D HSPA data of leaf (rendering by KURUMI viewer
[1]). The variance at each wavelength is clearly visible. the material at each wavelength. HSPA has the capability of providing spectral absorbance information on the interi-ors of a target material, which support many tasks such as medical diagnosis, classiﬁcation, and segmentation. Previ-ous studies have shown that HSPA is promising in compre-hensive clinical applications [35, 9, 20, 21].
A typical HSPA system is shown in Fig. 2, where an ob-ject is scanned by moving a wavelength-tunable laser and ultrasonic transducer along the surface of the object. There are two obstacles that severely limit practical use of HSPA: long acquisition time and complex noise. The data scan-ning process is time-consuming because it is performed ex-haustively in the spatial and spectral domains. The abil-ity to use fewer samples would speed up the data acquisi-tion. HSPA also suffers from a very low signal to noise ratio (SNR) when the amount of received incident light is weak and when the spectral absorption coefﬁcient is low.
Thus, the SNR of HSPA should be adaptively enhanced.
This issue motivated us to devise a method to restore full-grid, noise-free 4D HSPA data from incomplete and noisy observations.
In this paper, we ﬁrst conduct a reliability analysis for different depths and spectrum wavelengths. Based on the analysis, we formulate the 4D HSPA restoration task as an optimization problem. We explore the data correlations, in-4598
Figure 2. Scanning-based hyperspectral photoacoustic imaging system, whose scanning process is usually time-consuming. cluding transform sparsity and local self-similarity, and rep-resent them into regularization terms. Finally, we develop a numerical algorithm to reconstruct clear and high-quality data. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
All of the previous studies focused on 3D PA data com-pletion; thus, they only studied sub-sampling in the spatial domain. This means there hasn’t been enough research on 4D HSPA. 1. For the ﬁrst time, we consider the variance of the re-liability of PA data and perform a depth and spectral reliability analysis. 2. On the basis of the results of the analysis, we propose an integral framework for 4D data restoration, in which data completion and denoising are simultaneously con-ducted. 2.