Abstract
Visual Emotion Analysis (VEA) has attracted increas-ing attention recently with the prevalence of sharing images on social networks. Since human emotions are ambiguous and subjective, it is more reasonable to address VEA in a label distribution learning (LDL) paradigm rather than a single-label classiﬁcation task. Different from other LDL tasks, there exist intrinsic relationships between emotions and unique characteristics within them, as demonstrated in psychological theories. Inspired by this, we propose a well-grounded circular-structured representation to utilize the prior knowledge for visual emotion distribution learn-ing. To be speciﬁc, we ﬁrst construct an Emotion Circle to unify any emotional state within it. On the proposed Emo-tion Circle, each emotion distribution is represented with an emotion vector, which is deﬁned with three attributes (i.e., emotion polarity, emotion type, emotion intensity) as well as two properties (i.e., similarity, additivity). Besides, we design a novel Progressive Circular (PC) loss to penalize the dissimilarities between predicted emotion vector and la-beled one in a coarse-to-ﬁne manner, which further boosts the learning process in an emotion-speciﬁc way. Extensive experiments and comparisons are conducted on public vi-sual emotion distribution datasets, and the results demon-strate that the proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods. 1.

Introduction
Emotion serves as one of the most essential factors that distinguish human beings from other species, which affects almost every aspect of our daily lives. With the prevalence of social networks, more and more people tend to express their feelings by sharing images on the internet. There-∗Corresponding author
Figure 1. Four images with different emotion distributions from the involved datasets. Rather than a dominant emotion, images often evoke multiple emotions with different description degrees. fore, Visual Emotion Analysis (VEA) has drawn great at-tention recently, which aims at understanding how people feel emotionally towards different visual stimuli. The de-velopment in VEA may also bring beneﬁt to other related tasks (e.g. aesthetic assessment [2, 14], memorability es-timation [5, 31], and stylized image captioning [3, 9]), as well as potential applications (e.g. opinion mining [20, 32], intelligent advertising [13, 24], and mental disease treat-ment [15, 34]).
Most of the existing work often regard VEA as a single-label classiﬁcation task [29, 36, 38, 42, 47], assuming that each image only evokes a dominant emotion. However, these attempts over-simpliﬁed the complexity of human emotions and neglected the ambiguity and subjectivity lies in them.
In reality, different people may experience dif-ferent emotions towards one image (i.e., subjectivity), and even an individual may have diverse emotions towards one image (i.e., ambiguity). Label Distribution Learning (LDL) is proposed to deal with the problem when an instance is covered by a certain number of labels with different descrip-tion degrees [7]. Thus, it is more reasonable to address VEA in an LDL paradigm rather than a single-label classiﬁcation 4237
(1, 5 8
, 1)
𝜋𝜋 (0, 3 8
, 1)
𝜋𝜋 (1, 7 8
, 1)
𝜋𝜋
𝜋𝜋
, 1) (1, 9 8 (0, 1 8
, 1)
𝜋𝜋 (0, 15 8
, 1)
𝜋𝜋 (a) Mikel’s Wheel (1, 11 8
, 1) (0, 13 8
, 1)
𝜋𝜋
𝜋𝜋 (b) Emotion Circle
Figure 2. Mikel’s Wheel from psychological model (a), and the proposed Emotion Circle (b) with eight basic emotion vectors evenly distributed in accordance with Mikel’s Wheel. task, as shown in Fig. 1. Various methods have been pro-posed to deal with visual emotion distribution learning so far, including the earlier traditional algorithms [7, 39, 43] and the recent deep learning ones [11, 26, 35, 37, 39].
Most of the aforementioned methods simply implement general LDL algorithms for VEA. However, unlike other
LDL tasks, there exist intrinsic relationships between dis-tinct emotion labels, which can be viewed as useful prior knowledge of this task.
The study of human emotions is not only limited to computer vision ﬁeld, but also being heated discussed in psychology [17, 33], biology [22, 28], as well as sociol-ogy [12, 30]. Psychologists developed various emotion models to illustrate the intrinsic relationships among emo-tions, including the well-known Plutchik’s Wheel [27] and
Mikel’s Wheel [23, 45]. Besides, it has been demonstrated in psychology that people experience eight basic emotions, which can be expressed at different intensities and can be combined to form any emotional state [27].
Inspired by the above studies, we propose a well-grounded circular-structured representation for visual emo-tion distribution learning, aiming to effectively utilize the intrinsic relationships between emotions and unique char-acteristics within them. To be speciﬁc, we construct an
Emotion Circle to unify any emotional state within it, in-cluding both basic emotions and the compound ones. On the proposed Emotion Circle, each emotional state can be well-presented as an emotion vector with three attributes (i.e., emotion polarity, emotion type and emotion intensity) and two properties, namely similarity and additivity. As shown in Fig. 2, basic emotions are deﬁned with a set of unit vectors evenly-distributed on the Emotion Circle (b), corresponding to the circular structure of the eight basic emotions (i.e., amusement, awe, contentment, excitement, anger, disgust, fear, sad) in Mikel’s Wheel (a) [23, 45]. In addition to the above basic emotions, there also exist com-plex emotional states in reality (e.g., emotion distributions).
Therefore, considering that basic emotions have intensities and can be combined to form any emotional state [27], we propose a systematic approach to map any emotion distri-bution to a compound emotion vector on the Emotion Cir-cle. In detail, each emotion distribution is ﬁrst projected on basic emotion vectors with different emotion intensities ac-cording to their description degrees. Weighted basic emo-tion vectors are then combined to form a compound emo-tion vector, which can be regarded as the speciﬁc circular-structured representation of a given emotion distribution.
Most visual emotion distribution learning methods [11, 37, 39] simply leverage the Kullback-Leibler (KL) loss [18] to directly measure the differences between labeled emo-tion distributions and the predicted ones. However, rather than a set of uncorrelated labels, emotions are closely re-lated to each other and circularly distributed according to psychological models. To exploit such prior knowledge, we propose a novel Progressive Circular (PC) loss to learn the dissimilarities between the labeled emotion vector and the predicted one on the Emotion Circle in a coarse-to-ﬁne manner.
In detail, We ﬁrst construct polar loss to penal-ize the difference between the predicted polarity and the labeled one, which can be viewed as a coarse constraint towards a speciﬁc emotional state. After divide emotions into two polarities, we build up a more ﬁne-grained con-straint on emotion type by calculating the distance between them. Since emotion intensity is regarded as a crucial factor when describing a speciﬁc emotional state [27], we further leverage it as the conﬁdence degree to constrain the above two losses. By implementing both the KL loss and the pro-posed PC loss, the learning process of emotion distribution is not only optimized through its conventional mechanism, but also further boosted in a novel emotion-speciﬁc circular-structured manner.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose a well-grounded circular-structured repre-sentation to learn visual emotion distribution by uti-lizing the intrinsic relationships between emotions, which consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on several emotion distribution datasets. To the best of our knowledge, it is the ﬁrst time to system-atically exploit emotion relationships as prior knowl-edge for visual emotion distribution learning.
• We construct an Emotion Circle to unify any emotional state within it, where each emotion distribution is rep-resented as a compound emotion vector with three at-tributes as well as two properties according to psycho-logical models.
• We design a novel Progressive Circular loss to penal-ize the dissimilarities between labeled emotion vec-tors and the predicted ones on the Emotion Circle from coarse to ﬁne, which further boosts the visual emotion distribution learning process in an emotion-speciﬁc circular-structured manner. 4238
Figure 3. Framework of the proposed circular-structured representation. On the proposed Emotion Circle, both the predicted emotion distribution and the labeled one are represented with compound emotion vectors through a systematic approach. We then propose the
Progressive Circular loss in a coarse-to-ﬁne manner, which is further exploited to train the network together with Kullback-Leibler loss. 2.