Abstract
In this work, a robust and efﬁcient dual iterative reﬁne-ment (DIR) method is proposed for dense correspondence between two nearly isometric shapes. The key idea is to use dual information, such as spatial and spectral, or local and global features, in a complementary and effective way, and extract more accurate information from current iteration to use for the next iteration. In each DIR iteration, starting from current correspondence, a zoom-in process at each point is used to select well matched anchor pairs by a local mapping distortion criterion. These selected anchor pairs are then used to align spectral features (or other appropri-ate global features) whose dimension adaptively matches the capacity of the selected anchor pairs. Thanks to the effective combination of complementary information in a data-adaptive way, DIR is not only efﬁcient but also robust to render accurate results within a few iterations. By choos-ing appropriate dual features, DIR has the ﬂexibility to han-dle patch and partial matching as well. Our comprehensive experiments on various data sets demonstrate the superior-ity of DIR over other state-of-the-art methods in terms of both accuracy and efﬁciency. 1.

Introduction
Nonrigid shape matching is one of the most basic and important tasks in computer vision and shape analysis, e.g., shape registration, comparison, recognition, and retrieval.
Different from 2D images, shapes are usually represented as 2-dimensional manifolds embedded in R3. Many chal-lenges for nonrigid shape matching come from embedding ambiguities, i.e. shapes sharing the same metric (isometry) or very similar metrics (nearly isometry) can have drasti-cally different xyz-coordinates representations in R3.
To overcome these representation ambiguities, one of the commonly used strategies is to extract features which are isometrically invariant and robust to small perturba-tions. Along with the idea, many successful and popu-lar approaches are based on spectral geometry [40, 31, 52, 11, 28, 44]. Theoretically, the Laplace-Beltrami (LB) operator is isometrically invariant. As a generalization of
Fourier basis functions from Euclidean domains to mani-folds, the eigensystem of LB operator provides complete intrinsic spectral information of the underlying manifold.
Moreover, from lower eigen-modes to higher eigen-modes,
LB eigenfunctions also provide a multi-scale characteriza-tion of the underlying manifold from coarse to ﬁne resolu-tion. Although using spectral geometry removed possible non-rigid embedding ambiguities, new ambiguities emerge in the spectral domain due to non-uniqueness of the LB eigen-system, e.g., sign ambiguity for eigenfunctions, the ambiguity of choosing a basis for the LB eigen-space cor-responding to a non-simple LB eigenvalue (due to symme-try), the ambiguity of ordering for close eigenvalues (due to small perturbations). To handle these ambiguities and use spectral features accurately and robustly, a proper linear transformation (a rigid transformation for exact isometry) needs to be found to align the spectral modes between two shapes ﬁrst. This linear transformation is typically com-puted through some matching/correlation based on given (prior) correspondence, e.g., landmarks [35, 2, 29]. More-over, to resolve ﬁne details and acquire accurate correspon-dence between two shapes, high eigen-modes need to be used. However, the use of higher eign-modes will not only require more computation costs but, more importantly, can also cause instability with respect to small perturbations.
To tackle the instability issue of using high eigen-modes directly, one natural multi-scale approach is to start from a correspondence at a coarse scale using a few low modes and iteratively reﬁne the correspondence at a ﬁner scale by adding more higher modes gradually. The main mo-tivation is that the linear transformation (a small matrix) on a coarse scale between two truncated spectral func-tional spaces spanned by a few low eigen-modes can be determined efﬁciently and stably from an initial approxi-mate or limited correspondence. Once low eigen-modes are aligned well, an improved correspondence, especially be-tween smooth parts of the two shapes, is likely obtained.
The improved correspondence is then used to determine the 15930
More speciﬁcally, spatial matching via local mapping dis-tortion (see Deﬁnition 1) is applied point-wisely to choose well-matched correspondence – anchor pairs, at the current stage. Once anchor pairs are selected, they are used to ﬁnd 1) the maximal dimension of spectral functional space that can be robustly and accurately determined by these anchor pairs based on their distribution, and 2) the linear transfor-mation that aligns the spectral basis at the next scale which will lead to a more reﬁned correspondence at next stage.
This remarkable simple strategy addresses the aforemen-tioned two critical issues in previous multi-scale approaches using only spectral matching and allows one to utilize all well-matched pairs from the current step to jump to the next step in an accurate, efﬁcient, stable, and data-adaptive way.
We use extensive numerical experiments to show that our simple strategy, DIR, outperforms start-of-the-art model-based methods in terms of both accuracy and efﬁciency markedly. By choosing appropriate and application-speciﬁc dual features, DIR enjoys the ﬂexibility to handle differ-ent scenarios, such as raw point clouds, patch and partial matching (as illustrated in Figure 1). We defer a detailed explanation of this Figure in Section 5.
Contributions. We summarize our main contributions:
• By combining spatial matching via local mapping dis-tortion and spectral matching via the LB eigen-basis, the proposed DIR goes from coarse to ﬁne resolution stably and effectively in a data-adaptive way which overcomes the main challenges in spectral matching.
• By generalizing this dual reﬁnement strategy to other local and global features such as local mapping distor-tion and global geodesic distance, DIR handles patch and partial matching.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide a brief review of some related work. Then we present our proposed method, DIR, in detail followed by a discussion about a few possible extensions of our method in Section 3. After that, we conduct extensive experiments on various benchmark data sets and compare DIR to other state-of-the-art methods in terms of both accuracy and efﬁ-ciency in Section 5. We conclude the paper in Section 6. 2.