Abstract
Reasoning the human-object interactions (HOI) is es-sential for deeper scene understanding, while object affor-dances (or functionalities) are of great importance for hu-man to discover unseen HOIs with novel objects. Inspired by this, we introduce an affordance transfer learning ap-proach to jointly detect HOIs with novel object and rec-ognize affordances. Speciﬁcally, HOI representations can be decoupled into a combination of affordance and object representations, making it possible to compose novel inter-actions by combining affordance representations and novel object representations from additional images, i.e. transfer-ring the affordance to novel objects. With the proposed affordance transfer learning, the model is also capable of inferring the affordances of novel objects from known af-fordance representations. The proposed method can thus be used to 1) improve the performance of HOI detection, especially for the HOIs with unseen objects; and 2) infer the affordances of novel objects. Experimental results on two datasets, HICO-DET and HOI-COCO (from V-COCO), demonstrate signiﬁcant improvements over recent state-of-the-art methods for HOI detection and object affordance de-tection. Code is available at https://github.com/ zhihou7/HOI-CL.
Figure 1. An intuitive example to demonstrate affordance trans-fer learning for jointly exploring human interactions with novel objects (e.g., “tiger”), and recognizing the affordance of novel ob-jects. The proposed method is able to learn from the unseen in-teraction samples (e.g., “ride tiger”) that are composed from af-fordance representations and novel object representations, which meanwhile transfers the affordance to novel objects and enables the object affordance recognition. 1.

Introduction
Human-object interaction (HOI) detection aims to local-ize the human and objects in a given image, and recog-nize the interactions between the human and objects [4].
Considering the combinatorial nature of HOIs, there are al-ways a variety of rare or unseen interactions with novel ob-jects (e.g., “ride tiger”), which remains a great challenge for the HOI detection model to detect unseen interactions with those novel objects.
The interactions between the human and object, hhuman, verb, objecti, can be captured by either a human-centric (actions) or object-centric (affordance) manner.
Speciﬁcally, each HOI can be disentangled into a verb and an object, in which the verb also indicates one of the pos-sible affordances (or functionalities) of the object [12, 16], i.e. what actions can be applied to a particular object [11].
Therefore, we are able to jointly learn the affordances of object from the HOI samples, making it possible to com-495
pose new HOIs by combining the affordance representa-tions in existing HOIs with novel object representations.
Meanwhile, the composition of object representations and the corresponding affordance representations transfers the affordance representation (verb) to novel objects, which we term as affordance transfer learning or ATL. The affordance transfer learning empowers the shared affordance represen-tation learning among different objects, and further facili-tates the detection on HOIs with novel objects. For exam-ple, with the shared affordance representation (e.g., “ride-able”) between “tiger” and “horse” as illustrated in Figure 1, we are able to compose new HOIs (i.e., “ride tiger”), and thus enable the detection of unseen HOIs. The proposed affordance transfer learning framework further generalizes the compositional learning for HOI detection [18] with the ability to detect HOI with additional unseen objects, rather than only the objects from existing HOI samples.
The proposed affordance transfer learning also empow-ers the HOI detection model to learn object affordance in a weakly supervised manner. Recent HOI detection ap-proaches [9, 21, 2, 22, 18, 8] usually fail to explore the possibility of object affordance recognition with the HOI detection model, and previous affordance learning methods
[16] largely ignore transferring shared affordance represen-tations from existing HOIs to novel objects by HOI detec-tion model. By composing new HOI samples from the af-fordance representations and novel object representations, affordance transfer learning enables the HOI model to dis-tinguish whether a novel object representation can be com-bined or not with an affordance representation (i.e., verb).
We thus recognize object affordances with HOI model as follows: 1) we maintain a feature bank of decoupled affor-dance representations from the HOI detection dataset; 2) we extract object representations from additional object detec-tion datasets using the same HOI backbone network; and 3) we combine the object representations with all affordance representations in the feature bank as the input of the HOI classiﬁer. Finally, we are able to obtain a set of HOI predic-tions, which are further used to infer the object affordances.
Overall, the main contribution of this paper can be summa-rized as follows,
• We introduce an affordance transfer learning frame-work to exploit a broader source of data for HOI de-tection, especially for human interactions with novel objects.
• We incorporate HOI detection network with decom-posed affordances to infer the affordance of novel ob-jects.
• The proposed method not only improves recent state-of-the-art HOI detection methods but also facilitates the recognition of object affordance at the same time. 2.