Abstract
While the accuracy of 3D human pose estimation from images has steadily improved on benchmark datasets, the best methods still fail in many real-world scenarios. This suggests that there is a domain gap between current datasets and common scenes containing people. To obtain ground-truth 3D pose, current datasets limit the complex-ity of clothing, environmental conditions, number of sub-jects, and occlusion. Moreover, current datasets evalu-ate sparse 3D joint locations corresponding to the major joints of the body, ignoring the hand pose and the face shape. To evaluate the current state-of-the-art methods on more challenging images, and to drive the ﬁeld to address new problems, we introduce AGORA, a synthetic dataset with high realism and highly accurate ground truth. Here we use 4240 commercially-available, high-quality, textured human scans in diverse poses and natural clothing; this
*This work was done while DTH was at MPI-IS. includes 257 scans of children. We create reference 3D poses and body shapes by ﬁtting the SMPL-X body model (with face and hands) to the 3D scans, taking into account clothing. We create around 14K training and 3K test im-ages by rendering between 5 and 15 people per image us-ing either image-based lighting or rendered 3D environ-ments, taking care to make the images physically plausi-ble and photoreal. In total, AGORA consists of 173K in-dividual person crops. We evaluate existing state-of-the-art methods for 3D human pose estimation on this dataset. and ﬁnd that most methods perform poorly on images of children. Hence, we extend the SMPL-X model to bet-ter capture the shape of children. Additionally, we ﬁne-tune methods on AGORA and show improved performance on both AGORA and 3DPW, conﬁrming the realism of the dataset. We provide all the registered 3D reference training data, rendered images, and a web-based evaluation site at https://agora.is.tue.mpg.de/. 13468
1.

Introduction
The ﬁeld of 3D human pose and shape (3DHPS) es-timation from images has advanced rapidly with steadily decreasing errors on standard benchmarks [17, 21, 26, 27, 36, 39, 47]. Large training datasets and benchmarks, with ground truth, enable progress and quantitative evaluation.
These are difﬁcult to obtain in the case of 3DHPS. Ex-isting datasets have signiﬁcant limitations and the rate of progress now suggests that these benchmarks are becoming saturated, making it difﬁcult to evaluate how close the ﬁeld is to fully robust and general solutions. These datasets often have limited clothing, focus on single subjects, have limited occlusion, are captured in laboratory environments, or have a limited range of ages and ethnicities. Additionally, ac-curacy is evaluated based on a small number of 3D joints, while the body is much more complex. To drive advances in the ﬁeld, we propose a novel dataset that includes chal-lenging scenarios neglected by earlier datasets and a more challenging evaluation protocol.
AGORA (Avatars in Geography Optimized for Regres-sion Analysis) is a new publicly available dataset that in-cludes high-resolution (4K) images with ground truth 3D bodies. AGORA goes beyond previous datasets in impor-tant ways. It includes accurate 3D body pose and shape of people in varied and complex clothing. People with var-ied poses, ages and ethnicities appear in complex natural scenes with natural lighting. Additionally, the dataset in-cludes person-person occlusion, environmental occlusion, camera frame occlusion, crowds, children, face and hand pose, large ﬁeld of view images and people appearing at a wide range of spatial scales. To the best of our knowledge,
AGORA is the only dataset that provides all these features together with highly accurate 3D ground truth. Figure 1 shows a few representative examples from the dataset.
Since there is currently no technology to capture ground truth body shape and pose for real images of this com-plexity, we rely on synthetic data and a graphics rendering pipeline. Speciﬁcally, we purchased 4240 high-quality tex-tured scans of people, which include 257 child scans from 3DPeople [1], AXYZ [2], Human Alloy [4] and Render-people [7]. These scans provide a rich variety of ethnic-ity, age, pose, and clothing variation with realistic textures.
We also gathered a variety of scenes as HDRI panoramas and 3D environments. We randomly sample 3D people and place them in scenes at random distances and orientations.
We then render them realistically using a game engine opti-mized for high-quality output [8].
For every scan, we ﬁt the SMPL-X body model [37], taking great care to accurately capture the correct body shape, pose, hand shape, and facial shape; see Fig. 1 mid-dle row. To generate the AGORA ground truth (or refer-ence data), we take an optimization-based approach that ﬁts
SMPL-X to each scan. Speciﬁcally, we estimate both the pose and body shape under clothing, similar to [10, 56].
The estimated SMPL-X ﬁts have an average error of 5mm, making them accurate enough to benchmark existing state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods. For backward compatibility with SMPL, we also provide ground truth in the gender-neutral SMPL format1 [33] used by many current meth-ods [25, 27, 47].
In addition to adults, the AGORA dataset contains im-It is probably the only dataset of chil-ages of children. dren with reference 3D pose and shape. Existing 3DHPS methods focus on adult bodies and perform poorly on im-ages of children. With AGORA, we evaluate this perfor-mance, but go further and extend the SMPL-X shape space to capture the variation in body shape beween infants and adults. Speciﬁcally, we introduce a shape dimension that interpolates between an adult SMPL-X body template and the infant SMIL template [18], which we convert to SMPL-X format. This results in an extra shape parameter that can be optimized like any other SMPL-X shape parameter.
We make the SMPL-X ﬁts available for all the 14529 training and 1225 validation images, enabling training with
AGORA. We withhold the ground truth bodies from the 3387 test images and instead provide an evaluation server.
While we cannot provide the commercial scans, we provide a “shopping list” of the training and validation scans so that others can purchase them. Purchasing the scans extends the applications of AGORA to other problems such as 3D cloth-ing modeling, neural avatars, and shape regression. We also provide the test scripts for researchers to test their methods on the validation set.
We use AGORA to evaluate SOTA 3DHPS methods with a novel protocol. In addition to the common 3D joint-based error measures, we provide a vertex-to-vertex error, and evaluate body, hands and face pose and shape. We also use 2D occlusion masks (Fig. 1 bottom row) to evaluate the performance of methods at varying levels of occlusion.
Since our images contain multiple people, methods may de-tect too few as well as too many people. Consequently, we introduce an error measure that goes beyond the stan-dard single-person measures and rewards methods for both 3DHPS and detection accuracy. We observe higher errors for SOTA methods on AGORA than on other datasets, sug-gesting that AGORA is more challenging. We also show that our training set can be used to improve recent 3D pose estimation methods [27] not only on AGORA but also on 3DPW [52]. This validates that the synthetic data is sufﬁ-ciently real to be useful.
In summary, we contribute a new, varied and challeng-ing dataset to evaluate and improve the SOTA in 3D hu-man pose and shape estimation and to push the ﬁeld in new 1Given a SMPL-X mesh, we convert it to gender-neutral SMPL format by ﬁtting the gender-neutral SMPL template to it. In this work, SMPL ﬁts are always generated through this process unless otherwise stated. 13469
directions. The dataset is synthetic but diverse and realis-tic. We use new evaluation metrics and provide detailed analysis of limitations of current methods. We also in-troduce a new child model to generate better ground truth shape for children. We provide the training and valida-tion set images with SMPL-X and SMPL ground truth and 2D masks. We also provide test images along with eval-uation code and will maintain a web evaluation server: https://agora.is.tue.mpg.de/. 2.