Abstract
Visual object tracking aims to precisely estimate the bounding box for the given target, which is a challeng-ing problem due to factors such as deformation and occlu-sion. Many recent trackers adopt the multiple-stage strategy to improve bounding box estimation. These methods ﬁrst coarsely locate the target and then reﬁne the initial predic-tion in the following stages. However, existing approaches still suffer from limited precision, and the coupling of dif-ferent stages severely restricts the method’s transferability.
This work proposes a novel, ﬂexible, and accurate reﬁne-ment module called Alpha-Reﬁne (AR), which can signiﬁ-cantly improve the base trackers’ box estimation quality. By exploring a series of design options, we conclude that the key to successful reﬁnement is extracting and maintaining detailed spatial information as much as possible. Following this principle, Alpha-Reﬁne adopts a pixel-wise correlation, a corner prediction head, and an auxiliary mask head as the core components. Comprehensive experiments on Track-ingNet, LaSOT, GOT-10K, and VOT2020 benchmarks with multiple base trackers show that our approach signiﬁcantly improves the base tracker’s performance with little extra latency. The proposed Alpha-Reﬁne method leads to a se-ries of strengthened trackers, among which the ARSiamRPN (AR strengthened SiamRPNpp) and the ARDiMP50 (AR strengthened DiMP50) achieve good efﬁciency-precision trade-off, while the ARDiMPsuper (AR strengthened DiMP-super) achieves very competitive performance at a real-time speed. Code and pretrained models are available at https://github.com/MasterBin-IIAU/AlphaReﬁne. 1.

Introduction
Precise box estimation is indispensable for a success-ful tracker. Early trackers usually solve this problem by
*Equal contribution.
†Corresponding Author: Dr. Dong Wang, wdice@dlut.edu.cn
Table 1. Oracle experiment on LaSOT. The center of the search region is always set at the center of the ground truth, reﬂecting the box estimation capacity of these methods. The best three results are marked in red, green and blue bold fonts respectively.
Oracle
SiamRPNpp[23]
ATOM[7]
DiMPsuper[2]
ECO[6]
AlphaReﬁne
AUC PNorm 0.829 0.682 0.686 0.580 0.799 0.693 0.666 0.496 0.902 0.762
P 0.745 0.604 0.734 0.533 0.919 multi-scale search [1, 6, 35, 3] or sampling-then-regression strategy [37, 29], which are inaccurate and greatly limit the performance of the trackers. For obtaining more robust and precise tracking results, many state-of-the-art track-ers [40, 12, 7, 2] adopt a multiple-stage tracking strategy, which introduces additional tracking stages for more pre-cise box estimation. These trackers ﬁrst coarsely locate the target and then reﬁne the initial result in the additional track-ing stages to get more precise box prediction. However, this box estimation can still be improved, even for state-of-the-art trackers. An oracle experiment veriﬁes this opinion.
We set the tracker’s search region always centering at the ground truth so that the performance will be mainly deter-mined by the capacity of box estimation. Table 1 shows that with the aforementioned oracle setting, state-of-the-art trackers’ AUC scores are still far from perfection, indicating unsatisfying box estimation, although some methods (e.g.
ATOM [7], DiMP [2]) have built-in box estimation mod-ules. In contrast, given the perfectly centered search region, the proposed Alpha-Reﬁne achieves signiﬁcantly better per-formance, demonstrating that Alpha-Reﬁne’s superiority in box estimation.
Additionally, most of reﬁnement methods in existing trackers [40, 12, 7, 2] are weak in transferability, because their training is coupled with other components. Extra re-training is required if above reﬁnement modules are applied to new base trackers. As opposed to these methods, Alpha-5289
Figure 1. Performance improvement of our Alpha-Reﬁne module on LaSOT. ‘Base’: the base tracker; ‘Base+AR’: the base tracker with Alpha-Reﬁne (AR). This ﬁgure shows that all base trackers are signiﬁcantly improved by the proposed AR module.
Reﬁne is trained independently and can be directly applied to any existing trackers in a plug-and-play style, requiring no extra training or modiﬁcation of the base tracker.
In this work, a series of design options are investigated and compared. Speciﬁcally, we assess multiple feature fu-sion modules and prediction heads. We also explore to use an auxiliary mask head, which introduces pixel-level super-vision into the training. We ﬁnd that extracting and main-taining precise spatial information is the key to precise box estimation. To this end, we ﬁnally adopt a pixel-wise corre-lation as well as a key-point style prediction head for better maintaining and utilizing the detailed spatial information.
Additionally, an auxiliary mask head is used, which en-courages the network to extract more detailed spatial infor-mation, leading to more precise box estimation. Moreover, if we reserve the mask head at the inference stage, Alpha-Reﬁne will enable the base trackers to predict the mask of the object, satisfying scenarios where the mask is required.
The design options will be discussed in Section 3 and veri-ﬁed in Section 4.
To verify the effectiveness of our Alpha-Reﬁne mod-ule, we choose six famous base trackers: ECO [6], RT-MDNet [16], SiamRPNpp [23], ATOM [7], DiMP [2], and DiMPsuper [2], on multiple tracking benchmarks, namely, LaSOT [11], GOT-10K [14], TrackingNet [28] and VOT2020 [19]. Take Fig. 1 as an example, exper-imental results show that our proposed reﬁnement mod-ule improves the base trackers’ performance signiﬁcantly.
Compared with its competitors (i.e.
IoU-Net [7, 2] and
SiamMask [42]), Alpha-Reﬁne’s performance also sur-passes them by a large margin.
The proposed Alpha-Reﬁne method leads to a se-ries of strengthened trackers, among which the AR-SiamRPN (Alpha-Reﬁne strengthened SiamRPNpp) and
ARDiMP50 (Alpha-Reﬁne strengthened DiMP50) achieve good efﬁciency-precision trade-off, while ARDiMPsuper (Alpha-Reﬁne strengthened DiMPsuper) achieves state-of-the-art performance at a real-time speed on multiple bench-marks. 2.