Abstract
Quick Response (QR) code is one of the most world-wide used two-dimensional codes. Traditional QR codes appear as random collections of black-and-white modules that lack visual semantics and aesthetic elements, which in-spires the recent works to beautify the appearances of QR codes. However, these works adopt ﬁxed generation algo-rithms and therefore can only generate QR codes with a pre-deﬁned style. In this paper, combining the Neural Style
Transfer technique, we propose a novel end-to-end method, named ArtCoder, to generate the stylized QR codes that are personalized, diverse, attractive, and scanning-robust. To guarantee that the generated stylized QR codes are still scanning-robust, we propose a Sampling-Simulation layer, a module-based code loss, and a competition mechanism.
The experimental results show that our stylized QR codes have high-quality in both the visual effect and the scanning-robustness, and they are able to support the real-world ap-plication.
∗The corresponding author. 1.

Introduction
With the ubiquity of smartphones, the Quick Response (QR) code [1] has become one of the most-used types of two-dimensional codes, and has been popularly applied in many scenarios including social networks, mobile pay-ments, and advertisements. Traditional QR codes are ma-trix codes consisting of black-and-white squares modules that are visual-unpleasant and meaningless to human vision
[Fig. 1(a)]. An appealing QR code will attract more people to scan the code and increase the link visits [2–4], which inspires the recent works to beautify the appearances of QR codes [2–7] (i.e., endowing QR codes with visual semantics or aesthetic elements). However, these works adopt ﬁxed generation algorithms and therefore can only generate QR codes with a pre-deﬁned style, [Fig. 2(b)-(f)], which limits the personalized choices of users.
In this paper, employing the Neural Style Transfer (NST) technique, we propose an end-to-end method, named Art-Coder, to generate the stylized QR codes. These stylized codes combine the visual effect of stylized images and the functionality of QR codes, which are personalized, diverse, 2277                  
and scanning-robust [as shown in Fig. 1(b)]. Although the recent NST works (e.g., [8–12]) have made great progress on stylizing images, however, for generating stylized QR codes, the big extra challenge is to guarantee the scanning-robustness of output codes after giving them art styles. To address this issue, Xu et al. [13] propose a two-staged method, i.e, a QR code is ﬁrst stylized by the NST mod-el [12], and then all error modules caused by stylization are repaired by a post-processing algorithm. Although this method can produce the stylized QR codes, as shown in
Fig. 2(h) upper row, the repaired modules are distracting and cannot be well fused with the entire image, due to the asynchrony of stylization and module repair.
Unlike existing works, our ArtCoder is the ﬁrst end-to-end method to stylize an image and fuse it with the QR code message simultaneously. Moreover, ArtCoder not on-ly blends the black/white modules in an invisible and at-tractive manner [Fig. 1(b)], but also preserves the scanning-robustness. To improve the performances in both scanning-robustness and visual quality, we propose three key im-provements as follows. First, we analysis the relationship between the convolutional layers and the sampling process of QR code readers, and propose a Sampling-Simulation (SS) layer to extract the encoding message of QR codes.
Second, we propose a module-based code loss to control the scanning-robustness of the stylized QR codes. Third, we propose a competition mechanism between the visual quality and the scanning-robustness to improve their per-formances.
The main contributions of our work are three-fold:
• we propose a novel end-to-end method ArtCoder to generate the stylized QR codes that are personalized, diverse, and scanning-robust.
• we propose a Sampling-Simulation (SS) layer to ex-tract the message of QR codes, and introduce the module-based code loss to preserve the scanning-robustness of the stylized QR codes.
• we propose a competition mechanism to guarantee the high-quality of the stylized QR codes in both scanning-robustness and visual effect. 2.