Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have shown satisfactory performance in synthetic image generation by devising complex network structure and adversarial train-ing scheme. Even though GANs are able to synthesize re-alistic images, there exists a number of generated images with defective visual patterns which are known as artifacts.
While most of the recent work tries to ﬁx artifact gener-ations by perturbing latent code, few investigate internal units of a generator to ﬁx them. In this work, we devise a method that automatically identiﬁes the internal units gen-erating various types of artifact images. We further pro-pose the sequential correction algorithm which adjusts the generation ﬂow by modifying the detected artifact units to improve the quality of generation while preserving the orig-inal outline. Our method outperforms the baseline method in terms of FID-score and shows satisfactory results with human evaluation. 1.

Introduction
In recent years, GANs have become more powerful in terms of producing photo-realistic images [13, 12] which are often hard to distinguish from real samples.
In addi-tion, they have become increasingly better at producing di-verse sets of generated samples. These outstanding abili-ties pave way for GANs to be employed in various real-life domains [9, 18]. The main focus of existing work in the
GAN domain has been on improving the quality of synthe-sis by changing the training scheme or devising more com-plex models. Despite considerable successes, GANs still suffer from producing outputs that contain unrealistic re-gions, so-called artifacts, which make them unsuitable for being employed in mission-critical applications. As a re-sult, examining the root cause of such phenomena and pos-∗Equal contribution
†Corresponding Author sible solutions to enhance the overall quality has proved to be important.
Recent work removes artifact areas by perturbing the latent codes [22]. Defective units are removed based on understanding the representation of internal units and hu-man annotation [3]. Unlike the previous methods, we iden-tify defective units by learning a classiﬁer from annotated samples. Furthermore, by utilizing an obtained explanation map, we devise our own global multi-layer artifact unit ab-lation scheme which enhances the quality of defective gen-erations while preserving plausible generations.
In our approach, we ﬁrst annotate randomly sampled generations into two categories, Normal and Artifact, based on predeﬁned criteria. Then we train a classiﬁer on all the annotated generations and some randomly sampled real im-ages to classify images into their corresponding categories.
Our trained classiﬁer can generate an estimated mask for de-fective regions by employing an explanation method [21].
By measuring the alignment between an individual inter-nal unit’s activation and the defective regions’ segmentation mask, we identify units inducing artifacts. In order to cor-rect the artifact areas in the generations, we ablate units with the highest overlap score.
In summary, the contribution of our work is three-fold:
• We compile a large dataset of curated ﬂawed genera-tions and provide a comprehensive analysis on artifact generations.
• We identify defective units in a generative model by measuring the intersection-over-union (IoU) of the unit’s activation map and pseudo artifact region masks obtained by training a simple classiﬁer on our dataset.
• We propose an artifact removal method by globally ablating defective units which enhances the quality of artifact samples while maintaining normal samples from drastic change. We further improve the approach by sequentially ablating the defective units throughout consequent layers. 7932
Artifact Unit Identification
Labeled Generations
Normal
Artifact
Featuremaps
GradCAM Mask
GAP: Global Average Pooling (cid:575) Grad-CAM Flow
Single unit  (cid:1873)
: (cid:3039) (cid:1833)(cid:3013)
Single-layer Correction (cid:1878)
: (cid:2869) (cid:1833)(cid:3039)
Sequential Corrections
: (cid:3039) (cid:1833)(cid:3013) (cid:1878)(cid:1878)(cid:1878)
: (cid:1878)(cid:1878)(cid:1878)
:
Artifact
Normal
Real 8 1
-t e
N s e
R
P
A
G
Classifier (cid:575) Generation Flow (cid:575) Stopped Flow
: (cid:3039) (cid:1833)(cid:3013) (cid:2869) (cid:1833)(cid:3039) (cid:2869) (cid:1833)(cid:3039)
Figure 1: Identiﬁcation of the artifact units for each layer (top) and the generation ﬂow for two correction methods (bottom).
Identiﬁcation measures the IoU between defective regions (GradCAM mask) and a unit u for artifact generations. The average of IoUs over samples is used as the defective scores in the layer. The sequential correction method adjusts the generation
ﬂow of defective units and improves GANs without retraining. 2.