Abstract
Video super-resolution (VSR) approaches tend to have more components than the image counterparts as they need to exploit the additional temporal dimension. Complex de-signs are not uncommon. In this study, we wish to untangle the knots and reconsider some most essential components for VSR guided by four basic functionalities, i.e., Propaga-tion, Alignment, Aggregation, and Upsampling. By reusing some existing components added with minimal redesigns, we show a succinct pipeline, BasicVSR, that achieves ap-pealing improvements in terms of speed and restoration quality in comparison to many state-of-the-art algorithms.
We conduct systematic analysis to explain how such gain can be obtained and discuss the pitfalls. We further show the extensibility of BasicVSR by presenting an information-reﬁll mechanism and a coupled propagation scheme to fa-cilitate information aggregation. The BasicVSR and its ex-tension, IconVSR, can serve as strong baselines for future
VSR approaches. 1.

Introduction
Compared to single-image super-resolution, which fo-cuses on the intrinsic properties of a single image for the upscaling task, video super-resolution (VSR) poses an ex-tra challenge as it involves aggregating information from multiple highly-related but misaligned frames in video se-quences.
Various approaches have been proposed to address the challenge. Some designs can be highly complex. For in-stance, in the representative method EDVR [32], a multi-scale deformable alignment module and multiple attention layers are adopted for aligning and integrating the features
∗Corresponding author
BasicVSR (ours)
IconVSR (ours)
EDVR (CVPRW19)
RSDN  (ECCV20)
RBPN  (CVPR19)
RLSP  (ICCVW19)
FRVSR (CVPR18)
PFNL (ICCV19)
DUF (CVPR18)
# Params 5M 10M 15M 20M
Figure 1. Speed and performance comparison. Without bells and whistles, BasicVSR outperforms state-of-the-art methods with high efﬁciency. Built upon BasicVSR, IconVSR further im-proves the performance. Comparisons are performed on UDM10 dataset [34].
In RBPN [9], multiple projection from different frames. modules are used to sequentially aggregate features from multiple frames. Such designs are effective but inevitably increase the runtime and model complexity (see Fig. 1).
In addition, unlike SISR, the potentially complex and dis-similar designs of VSR methods pose difﬁculties in imple-menting and extending existing approaches, hampering re-producibility and fair comparisons.
There is a need to step back and reconsider the di-verse designs of VSR models, with the aim to search for a more generic, efﬁcient, and easy-to-implement baseline for VSR. We start our search by decomposing popular VSR approaches into submodules based on functionalities. As summarized in Table 1, most existing methods entail four inter-related components, namely, propagation, alignment, aggregation, and upsampling. Such a decomposition allows 4947
Table 1. Components in existing VSR methods. We categorize components based on their functionalities: i) Propagation refers to the way in which features are propagated temporally, ii) Alignment concerns on the spatial transformation applied to misaligned images/features, iii)
Aggregation deﬁnes the steps to combine aligned features, and iv) Upsampling describes the method to transform the aggregated features to the ﬁnal output image. Bolded texts correspond to designs that were reported to achieve better performance in the literature.
Sliding-Window
Recurrent
EDVR [31]
Local
Propagation
Yes (DCN)
Alignment
Aggregation Concatenate + TSA Concatenate
Upsampling
Pixel-Shufﬂe
Pixel-Shufﬂe
MuCAN [20]
Local
TDAN [30] BRCN [10, 11] FRVSR [25]
RSDN [12]
BasicVSR
IconVSR
Local
Bidirectional Unidirectional Unidirectional Bidirectional Bidirectional (coupled)
Yes (correlation) Yes (DCN)
No
Concatenate Concatenate
Pixel-Shufﬂe Pixel-Shufﬂe
Yes (ﬂow)
Yes (ﬂow)
Concatenate
Concatenate Concatenate
Pixel-Shufﬂe Pixel-Shufﬂe Pixel-Shufﬂe
No
Yes (ﬂow)
Concatenate + Reﬁll
Pixel-Shufﬂe us to systematically study various options under each com-ponent and understand their pros and cons.
Through extensive experiments, we ﬁnd that with mini-mal redesigns of existing options, one could already reach a strong yet efﬁcient baseline for VSR without bells and whis-tles. In this paper, we highlight one of such possibilities, named BasicVSR. We observe that, among the four afore-mentioned components, the choices of propagation and alignment components could lead to a big swing in terms of performance and efﬁciency. Our experiments suggest the use of bidirectional propagation scheme to maximize infor-mation gathering, and an optical ﬂow-based method to esti-mate the correspondence between two neighboring frames for feature alignment. By simply streamlining these prop-agation and alignment components with the commonly-adopted designs for aggregation (i.e. feature concatenation) and upsampling (i.e. pixel-shufﬂe [27]), BasicVSR outper-forms existing state of the arts [9, 12, 32] in both perfor-mance (up to 0.61 dB) and efﬁciency (up to 24× speedup).
Thanks to its simplicity and versatility, BasicVSR pro-vides a viable starting point for extending to more elabo-rated networks. By using BasicVSR as a foundation, we present IconVSR that comprises two novel extensions to improve the aggregation and the propagation components.
The ﬁrst extension is named information-reﬁll. This mech-anism leverages an additional module to extract features from sparsely selected frames (keyframes), and the fea-tures are then inserted into the main network for feature re-ﬁnement. The second extension is a coupled propagation scheme, which facilitates information exchange between the forward and backward propagation branches. The two modules not only reduce error accumulation during propa-gation due to occlusions and image boundaries, but also al-low the propagation to access complete information in a se-quence for generating high-quality features. With these two new designs, IconVSR surpasses BasicVSR with a PSNR improvement of up to 0.31 dB.
We believe that our work is timely, given the increasing number of approaches centered around the research of VSR.
A strong, simple yet extensible baseline is needed. Guided by the main functionalities in VSR approaches, we recon-sider some essential components in existing pipelines and present an efﬁcient baseline for VSR. We show that sim-ple components, when integrated properly, would synergize and lead to state-of-the-art performance. We further present an example of extending BasicVSR with two novel modules to reﬁne the propagation and aggregation components. 2.