Abstract
Weakly supervised segmentation methods using bounding box annotations focus on obtaining a pixel-level mask from each box containing an object. Existing methods typically depend on a class-agnostic mask generator, which operates on the low-level information intrinsic to an image. In this work, we utilize higher-level information from the behavior of a trained object detector, by seeking the smallest areas of the image from which the object detector produces al-most the same result as it does from the whole image. These areas constitute a bounding-box attribution map (BBAM), which identiﬁes the target object in its bounding box and thus serves as pseudo ground-truth for weakly supervised semantic and instance segmentation. This approach signif-icantly outperforms recent comparable techniques on both the PASCAL VOC and MS COCO benchmarks in weakly supervised semantic and instance segmentation. In addition, we provide a detailed analysis of our method, offering deeper insight into the behavior of the BBAM. The code is available at: https://github.com/jbeomlee93/BBAM . 1.

Introduction
Object segmentation is one of the most important steps in image recognition. Advances in deep learning have greatly improved the performance of semantic and instance segmen-tation [8, 23] through the use of huge amounts of pixel-level annotated training data. However, annotating with pixel-level masks requires a lot of effort. According to Bearman et al. [4], constructing a pixel-level mask for an image contain-ing an average of 2.8 objects takes about 4 minutes. This is why weakly supervised methods have been proposed, in which segmentation networks are trained using annotations that are less detailed than pixel-level masks, such as bound-ing boxes [11, 31, 61], or image-level tags [1, 2, 36].
The most easily obtainable annotation is the class label.
∗Correspondence to: Sungroh Yoon <sryoon@snu.ac.kr>.
Labeling an image with class labels takes around 20 sec-onds [4], but it only indicates that objects of certain classes are depicted and gives no information about their locations in the image. Moreover, class labels provide no help in sepa-rating different objects of the same class, which is the goal of instance segmentation.
Bounding boxes provide information about individual objects and their locations. Bounding box annotation takes about 38.1 seconds per image [5], which is much more attrac-tive than constructing pixel-level masks. Many researchers have tackled semantic segmentation [11, 31, 34, 61] and instance segmentation [3, 27, 31, 41, 63] using bounding box annotations as a search space in which a class-agnostic object mask can be found by an off-the-shelf object mask generator. These are mostly based on GrabCut [54] or mul-tiscale combinatorial grouping (MCG) [50]. Those mask generators operate on the low-level information of images, such as the color or brightness of pixels, and this limits the quality of the resulting mask. Thus, applying these mask generators to bounding box annotations requires additional steps such as estimating what proportion of the pixels in a bounding-box belong to the corresponding object [34, 61], iterative reﬁnement of an estimated mask [11], and auxiliary attention modules [34].
We propose a pixel-level method of localizing a target object inside its bounding box using a trained object detector.
We make use of attribution maps obtained from the trained object detector, which highlight the image regions that the detector focuses on in conducting object detection. Inspired by the perturbation methods used to explain the output of image classiﬁers [10, 17, 18], we introduce a bounding box attribution map (BBAM) which provides an indication of the smallest areas of an image that are sufﬁcient to make an object detector produce almost the same result as that from the original image. The BBAM identiﬁes the area occupied by the object in each bounding box predicted by the trained object detector. Since this localization takes place at the pixel level, it can be used as a pseudo ground truth for weakly supervised learning of semantic and instance segmentation. 2643
The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows.
•
•
•
We propose a bounding box attribution map (BBAM), which can draw on the rich semantics learned by an ob-ject detector to produce pseudo ground-truth for train-ing semantic and instance segmentation networks.
Our technique signiﬁcantly outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods of weakly supervised semantic and instance segmentation, assessed on the PASCAL VOC 2012 and MS COCO 2017 benchmarks.
We analyze our method from various viewpoints, pro-viding deeper insights into the properties of the BBAM. 2.