Abstract
Detecting oriented and densely packed objects remains challenging for spatial feature aliasing caused by the in-tersection of reception ﬁelds between objects. In this pa-per, we propose a convex-hull feature adaptation (CFA) approach for conﬁguring convolutional features in accor-dance with oriented and densely packed object layouts.
CFA is rooted in convex-hull feature representation, which deﬁnes a set of dynamically predicted feature points guided by the convex intersection over union (CIoU) to bound the extent of objects. CFA pursues optimal feature as-signment by constructing convex-hull sets and dynamically splitting positive or negative convex-hulls. By simulta-neously considering overlapping convex-hulls and objects and penalizing convex-hulls shared by multiple objects,
CFA alleviates spatial feature aliasing towards optimal fea-ture adaptation. Experiments on DOTA and SKU110K-R datasets show that CFA signiﬁcantly outperforms the baseline approach, achieving new state-of-the-art detec-tion performance. Code is available at github.com/SDL-GuoZonghao/BeyondBoundingBox.
Figure 1. Problem illustration. (Upper) When using box represen-tation, oriented and densely packed objects cause feature aliasing for the intersection of reception ﬁelds between objects. (Lower)
With convex-hull representation, our CFA approach adapts fea-tures located on regular convolutional maps to oriented and densely packed objects, solving the feature aliasing issue in a sys-tematic way. 1.

Introduction
Over the past decade, we witnessed substantial progress in visual object detection. This is attributed to the availabil-ity of deep networks incorporating rich feature representa-tion [16, 15] and large-scale databases [3, 17, 28] for pre-training representative models. However, most detectors encounter problems when objects, such as those in aerial images, are in arbitrary orientations [24], or have dissimilar layouts to the objects utilized during training. The problems become more serious when oriented objects are densely dis-tributed, because this causes spatial feature aliasing at the intersection of reception ﬁelds, Fig. 1(above).
∗Corresponding Author.
One solution for oriented object detection is fea-ture/anchor augmentation [19, 21, 20, 31], which produces features in multiple orientations for detector training. This intuitive solution, however, suffers a signiﬁcant increase in computational complexity and false detection. The other solution is deﬁning RoI transformers, which apply spatial transformations on RoIs while learning the parameters un-der the supervision of oriented bounding boxes [4]. Trans-formers have been promoted as being dynamic [24], atten-tive [37], and smoothed [36], enabling adaptive receptive
ﬁelds to adapt to object orientations. However, the problem about how to adapt feature grids to objects of arbitrary lay-outs remains unsolved, which causes feature aliasing, par-ticularly when objects are densely packed.
In this paper, we propose a convex-hull feature adapta-8792
tion (CFA) approach for oriented and densely packed ob-ject detection. The objective is to adapt features located within regular convolutional grids to objects with irregular layouts. We model object layouts as convex-hulls, which have natural advantages over rectangular boxes when re-quired to cover the full extent of objects while minimizing background regions, Fig. 1(below). On each convex-hull is a set of feature points (extreme points) which deﬁnes the ob-ject boundaries and indicates the Convex Intersection over
Union (CIoU) to determine object localization. Within the convex-hull, discriminative features represent the object ap-pearance for precise classiﬁcation.
The proposed detector consists of two stages, following the RepPoint method [38]. Initially, convex-hulls are gen-erated by predicting feature point offsets driven by object localization (CIoU) loss. Then, convex-hulls are reﬁned to cover the full extent of objects while classifying objects with the backgrounds driven by object localization and clas-siﬁcation loss. Meanwhile, CFA constructs a convex-hull set for each object so that features at the periphery of objects can be jointly optimized. To adapt convex-hulls to objects,
CFA deﬁnes a convex-hull set splitting strategy, under the guidance of gradient consistency. By dynamically catego-rizing convex-hulls into positives or negatives and penaliz-ing convex-hulls shared by neighboring objects, CFA allevi-ates feature aliasing and pursues optimal feature adaptation.
During the inference phase, single convex-hulls are used to localize objects without convex-hull set construction or set splitting, which guarantees detection is efﬁcient.
The contributions of this study include:
• We propose convex-hull representation, which is promising for detecting objects of irregular shapes and/or layouts via learnable feature conﬁguration.
• We propose the convex-hull feature adaptation (CFA) approach, which incorporates CIoU and feature anti-aliasing strategies and deﬁnes a systematic way to de-tect oriented and densely packed objects.
• We signiﬁcantly improved the performance upon the baseline method, achieving new state-of-the-art on commonly used benchmarks. 2.