Abstract
Camouﬂaged object segmentation (COS) aims to iden-tify objects that are “perfectly” assimilate into their sur-roundings, which has a wide range of valuable applications.
The key challenge of COS is that there exist high intrinsic similarities between the candidate objects and noise back-ground. In this paper, we strive to embrace challenges to-wards effective and efﬁcient COS. To this end, we develop a bio-inspired framework, termed Positioning and Focus
Network (PFNet), which mimics the process of predation in nature. Speciﬁcally, our PFNet contains two key mod-ules, i.e., the positioning module (PM) and the focus module (FM). The PM is designed to mimic the detection process in predation for positioning the potential target objects from a global perspective and the FM is then used to perform the identiﬁcation process in predation for progressively re-ﬁning the coarse prediction via focusing on the ambiguous regions. Notably, in the FM, we develop a novel distraction mining strategy for the distraction discovery and removal, to beneﬁt the performance of estimation. Extensive exper-iments demonstrate that our PFNet runs in real-time (72
FPS) and signiﬁcantly outperforms 18 cutting-edge models on three challenging datasets under four standard metrics. 1.

Introduction
Camouﬂage is the concealment of animals or objects by any combination of material, coloration, or illumination, for making the target objects hard to see (crypsis) or disguising them as something else (mimesis) [47]. Beneﬁting from the capability of ﬁnding out the camouﬂaged objects that are “seamlessly” embedded in their surroundings, camou-ﬂaged object segmentation (COS) has a wide range of valu-able applications in different ﬁelds, ranging from medical diagnosis (e.g., polyp segmentation [13] and lung infection segmentation [14]), industry (e.g., inspection of unqualiﬁed products on the automatic production line), agriculture (e.g.,
⋆ Xin Yang (xinyang@dlut.edu.cn) and Ziqi Wei are the correspond-ing authors.
Image
SINet
Ours
GT
Figure 1. Visual examples of camouﬂaged object segmentation.
While the state-of-the-art method SINet [12] confused by the background region which shares similar appearance with the cam-ouﬂaged objects (pointed to by a arrow in the top row) or the cam-ouﬂaged region that cluttered in the background (pointed to by a arrow in the bottom row), our method can eliminate these distrac-tions and generate accurate segmentation results. locust detection to prevent invasion), security and surveil-lance (e.g., search-and-rescue mission and the detection of pedestrians or obstacles in bad weather for automatic driv-ing), scientiﬁc research (e.g., rare species discovery), to art (e.g., photo-realistic blending and recreational art).
However, COS is a fundamentally challenging task due to the fact that the camouﬂage strategy works by deceiving the visual perceptual system of the observer [47] and thus a signiﬁcant amount of visual perception knowledge [50] is required to eliminate the ambiguities caused by the high in-trinsic similarities between the target object and the back-ground. Research into camouﬂaged object segmentation has a long and rich history in many ﬁelds such as biology and art [47]. Early methods are dedicated to distinguish-ing the foreground and background based on handcrafted low-level features such as texture [45], 3D convexity [39] and motion [28]. These features, however, have limited ca-pability to distinguish between the camouﬂaged and non-camouﬂaged objects, so the approaches based on them often fail in complex scenes. Despite the recently proposed deep learning-based approaches [26, 12, 58] have achieved per-formance improvement to some extent, there is still a large room for exploring the effective way of accurate COS.
In nature, prey animals make use of mechanisms such 8772
as camouﬂage to misdirect the visual sensory mechanisms of predators for reducing the risk of being detected [47].
Under the pressure of natural selection, predatory animals have evolved a variety of adaptations such as sharp senses and intelligent brains for the successful predation which can be divided into three stages, i.e., detection, identiﬁcation, and capture [15]. This motivates our bio-inspired solution to segment camouﬂaged objects by mimicking the ﬁrst two stages of predation.
In this paper, we propose a positioning and focus net-work (PFNet) which greatly improves the existing camou-ﬂaged object segmentation performance. Our PFNet con-tains two key modules, i.e., the positioning module (PM) and the focus module (FM). The PM is designed to mimic the detection process in predation for positioning the po-tential target objects from a global perspective and the FM is then used to perform the identiﬁcation process in preda-tion for reﬁning the initial segmentation results by focusing on the ambiguous regions. Speciﬁcally, the PM consists of a channel attention block and a spatial attention block and both of them are implemented in a non-local way to capture long-range semantic dependencies in terms of channel and spatial position for inferring the initial location of the target objects from a global perspective. The FM ﬁrst perform multi-scale context exploration based on the foreground-attentive (background-attentive) features for discovering the false-positive (false-negative) distractions and then remove these distractions to get the purer representations about the target objects. Such distraction mining strategy is imple-mented in an implicit way and is applied on different levels of features to progressively reﬁne the segmentation results, enabling our PFNet to possess the strong capability of accu-rately segmenting the camouﬂaged objects (see Figure 1 as an example). To sum up, our contributions are as follows:
• We introduce the concept of distraction to the COS problem and develop a novel distraction mining strat-egy for distraction discovery and removal, to beneﬁt the accurate segmentation of the camouﬂaged object.
• We propose a new COS framework, named position-ing and focus network (PFNet), which ﬁrst positioning the potential target objects by exploring long-range se-mantic dependencies and then focuses on distraction discovery and removal to progressively reﬁne the seg-mentation results.
• We achieve state-of-the-art camouﬂaged object seg-mentation performance on three benchmark datasets.
Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. 2.