Abstract
Person re-identiﬁcation (Re-ID) is to retrieve a particu-lar person captured by different cameras, which is of great signiﬁcance for security surveillance and pedestrian behav-ior analysis. However, due to the large intra-class variation of a person across cameras, e.g., occlusions, illuminations, viewpoints, and poses, Re-ID is still a challenging task in the ﬁeld of computer vision.
In this paper, to attack the issues concerning with intra-class variation, we propose a coarse-to-ﬁne Re-ID framework with the incorporation of auxiliary-domain classiﬁcation (ADC) and second-order information bottleneck (2O-IB). In particular, as an auxil-iary task, ADC is introduced to extract the coarse-grained essential features to distinguish a person from miscella-neous backgrounds, which leads to the effective coarse- and
ﬁne-grained feature representations for Re-ID. On the other hand, to cope with the redundancy, irrelevance, and noise contained in the Re-ID features caused by intra-class varia-tions, we integrate 2O-IB into the network to compress and optimize the features, without increasing additional com-putation overhead during inference. Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed method signiﬁcantly reduces the neural network output variance of intra-class person im-ages and achieves the superior performance to state-of-the-art methods. 1.

Introduction
Image-based person re-identiﬁcation (Re-ID) aims to re-trieve a particular person from a high volume of person im-ages captured by different cameras. Considering its crucial applications in public security surveillance, pedestrian be-havior analysis, etc., Re-ID has received increasing atten-tion in recent years.
* Yuzhen Niu is the corresponding author (e-mail: yuzhen-niu@gmail.com).
Figure 1. We present a novel coarse-to-ﬁne Re-ID framework. As-sisted by the task of auxiliary-domain classiﬁcation (ADC), our
Re-ID framework is enabling to learn from the coarse-grained to the ﬁne-grained features for distinguishing persons. Speciﬁcally, an extra-domain dataset and a Re-ID dataset are jointly utilized in
ADC. Second-order information bottleneck (2O-IB) module com-presses the redundant information and noise in the features to ob-tain a more concise and core representation. Last, the computed embedding vector for person representation is generated for Re-ID.
Owing to the ability of extracting excellent represen-tative features as well as the outstanding invariance em-bedding capability, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have become the predominant choices for Re-ID. CNNs-based Re-ID methods can be roughly categorized into 1) the representation learning methods that use classiﬁcation losses as the proxy targets to learn the person embeddings
[12, 43, 15, 26]; 2) the metric learning methods that aim to learn the similarity between two person images so that im-ages of the same person have greater similarity than those of different persons [25, 23, 22]; 3) the attribute learning methods that use the local attributes, such as clothing color, hair length/color, hat, and backpack, to identify a person
[18, 19, 40, 31]; 4) the local feature learning methods that use image dividing, skeleton key point positioning, and pos-ture correction to learn the features of each part of the per-son image, and then obtains the global features of the person through feature fusion [17, 37, 32, 33]; and 5) the genera-tive adversarial network (GAN) based methods that expand and augment person images in the training dataset to obtain 598
more generalized CNN models [8, 41].
Despite plenty of research progress, Re-ID is still a chal-lenging task, because there exist signiﬁcant intra-class vari-ations in the person images captured by different cameras, due to the changes in the background, illumination, view-point, and human poses. Learning robust Re-ID represen-tations against intra-class variations has been an attractive research topic. To address these concerns, the attention-based methods [24, 15, 13, 2] tend to highlight the informa-tive features and suppress the noise, while [14, 8, 41] apply
GANs to synthesize training data to cover the changes in different scenes. However, these methods have not thor-oughly resolve the concerns of intra-class variations, since the person images may be severely contaminated by mis-cellaneous backgrounds. Besides, the intra-class variations tend to make the Re-ID features vulnerable towards the low-level data uncertainty. Moreover, the complexity of existing models usually increase the computational overhead in the inference stage.
To cope with the concerns of intra-class variations, in this paper, we present an end-to-end hierarchical coarse-to-ﬁne Re-ID framework for person Re-ID, as shown in Figure 1. In the coarse stage, the framework focuses on extracting features to answer the question, “how to describe a person in an image and what are the characteristics of a person dif-ferent from other objects?” In the ﬁne stage, it focuses on the question, “how to distinguish different persons in dif-ferent images?” These two questions are formulated as a cascade of auxiliary-domain classiﬁcation (ADC) task and the Re-ID task. Effective coarse- and ﬁne-grained feature representations for Re-ID can be learned through multi-task learning of these two tasks. As shown in Figure 1, the pro-posed hierarchical framework is composed of the coarse-grained feature extraction (CGFE) module, the ﬁne-grained feature extraction (FGFE) module, as well as our proposed second-order information bottleneck (2O-IB) layers.
In order to reduce the impact of miscellaneous back-ground objects, we propose a simple yet effective solution.
Since all the images in the Re-ID dataset are person images, we leverage an extra-domain dataset, composed of images with non-person objects, to jointly train the CGFE and the
ﬁrst 2O-IB layer in ADC. In this way, the ADC task can reduce the inﬂuence of intra-class variations caused by the distractors, such as background, occlusion, and illumination in the images.
To further reduce the negative impact of data stochas-ticity, redundancy, and noise within data representation, we present a second-order information bottleneck, which is inspired by the information bottleneck (IB) proposed by
Tishby et al.
It has been widely applied to com-press the stochasticity of the representation in the input sig-nal, and improve the generalization ability of deep learn-ing models. The proposed 2O-IB layers are introduced be-[21]. fore the classiﬁcation layer that follows the CGFE mod-ule and before the embedding output layer that follows the
FGFE module to compress the stochasticity of features and strengthen the representativeness for the embedding vectors of the same person.
It is worth mentioning that the ADC task, 2O-IB layers, and the extra-domain dataset are only used in the training stage. On the inference stage, the ADC task and the extra-domain dataset are not necessary for Re-ID and the IB lay-ers can be equivalently replaced by fully-connected layers, thereby avoiding increasing the inference cost.
In summary, the main contributions of this paper are four-fold: 1) We propose an end-to-end hierarchical coarse-to-ﬁne framework for person Re-ID. The hierarchical model can realize person feature extraction and information compres-sion from coarse-grained to ﬁne-grained, and address the challenges of intra-class variations. 2) We formulate an auxiliary-domain classiﬁcation task for the coarse-grained feature extraction. The ADC task can help the model learn how to extract the most essential features of “person” that are different from other objects by introducing an extra image classiﬁcation dataset, thereby improving the Re-ID model’s ability to overcome the intra-class variations. 3) We propose a 2O-IB method that can reduce the im-pact of data stochasticity, redundancy, noise, and intra-class variation on data representation. The 2O-IB layers are only used during training and can be equivalently replaced by fully-connected layers during inference, which saves the ex-tra inference cost. 4) Experimental results show that the proposed hierar-chical framework for Re-ID achieves superior performance to state-of-the-art Re-ID methods. 2.