Abstract
Despite advances in feature representation, leveraging geometric relations is crucial for establishing reliable vi-sual correspondences under large variations of images. In this work we introduce a Hough transform perspective on convolutional matching and propose an effective geometric matching algorithm, dubbed Convolutional Hough Match-ing (CHM). The method distributes similarities of candidate matches over a geometric transformation space and evalu-ate them in a convolutional manner. We cast it into a train-able neural layer with a semi-isotropic high-dimensional kernel, which learns non-rigid matching with a small num-ber of interpretable parameters. To validate the effect, we develop the neural network with CHM layers that perform convolutional matching in the space of translation and scal-ing. Our method sets a new state of the art on standard benchmarks for semantic visual correspondence, proving its strong robustness to challenging intra-class variations. 1.

Introduction
Visual correspondence lies at the heart of image under-standing, being used as a core component for numerous tasks such as object recognition, image retrieval, motion es-timation, object tracking, and reconstruction [16]. With re-cent advances in deep neural networks [21, 23, 25, 36, 57], there has been substantial progress in learning robust fea-ture representation for establishing correspondences. De-spite the effectiveness of deep convolutional features, how-ever, spatial matching with a geometric constraint is still essential to handle image pairs with large variations, e.g., viewpoint and illumination changes, blur, occlusion, lack of texture, etc.
In particular, the presence of intra-class variations, i.e., scenes depicting different instances of the same categories, remains a critical challenge for correspon-dence [18, 20, 26, 32, 38, 42, 45, 47, 51, 52, 54]. The process of geometric matching is the de facto solution of choice, which most recent methods adopt in their models.
Geometric matching commonly relies on exploiting a geometric consensus of candidate matches to verify rela-Regions with different centers and scales
Matches of object regions with different centers and scales
Hough voting kernel convolution
CHM input: all possible candidate matches
CHM output: filtered matches 
Figure 1: Convolutional Hough matching (CHM) estab-lishes reliable correspondences across images by perform-ing position-aware Hough voting in a high-dimensional ge-ometric transformation space, e.g., translation and scaling. tive transformations.
In computer vision, RANSAC [15] and Hough transform [22] have long been used as geomet-ric veriﬁcation for wide-baseline correspondence problems with rigid motion models, while graph matching [5, 7, 14, 55] has played a main role in matching deformable objects with non-rigid motion. Recent work [6, 20, 45, 47] has ad-vanced the idea of Hough transform to perform non-rigid image matching, showing that the Hough voting process in-corporated in neural networks is effective for challenging correspondence problems with intra-class variations. How-ever, their matching modules are neither fully differentiable nor learnable, and weak to background clutter due to the position-invariant global Hough space.
In this work we introduce Convolutional Hough Match-ing (CHM) that distributes similarities of candidate matches over a geometric transformation space and evaluates them in a convolutional manner. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the convo-lutional nature makes the output equivariant to translation in the transformation space and also attentive to each posi-tion with its surrounding contexts, thus bringing robustness to background clutter. We design CHM as a learnable layer with an semi-isotropic high-dimensional kernel that acts on top of a correlation tensor. The CHM layer is compati-ble with any neural networks that use correlation computa-tion, allowing ﬂexible non-rigid matching and even multiple 2940
matching surfaces or objects. It naturally generalizes exist-ing 4D convolutions [26, 40, 61, 54] and provides a new perspective of Hough transform on convolutional match-ing. To demonstrate the effect, we propose the neural net-work with CHM layers that perform convolutional match-ing in the high-dimensional space of translation and scaling.
Our method clearly outperforms state-of-the-art methods on standard benchmarks for semantic correspondence, proving its strong robustness to challenging intra-class variations. 2.