Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel unpaired point cloud completion network, named Cycle4Completion, to infer the complete geometries from a partial 3D object. Previous unpaired completion methods merely focus on the learn-ing of geometric correspondence from incomplete shapes to complete shapes, and ignore the learning in the reverse direction, which makes them suffer from low completion accuracy due to the limited 3D shape understanding abil-ity. To address this problem, we propose two simultaneous cycle transformations between the latent spaces of com-plete shapes and incomplete ones. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁrst cycle transforms shapes from incomplete domain to com-plete domain, and then projects them back to the incom-plete domain. This process learns the geometric character-istic of complete shapes, and maintains the shape consis-tency between the complete prediction and the incomplete input. Similarly, the inverse cycle transformation starts from complete domain to incomplete domain, and goes back to complete domain to learn the characteristic of in-complete shapes. We experimentally show that our model with the learned bidirectional geometry correspondence outperforms state-of-the-art unpaired completion methods.
Code will be available at https:// github.com/ diviswen/Cycle4Completion. 1.

Introduction
Point clouds, as a popular 3D representation, can be eas-ily produced by 3D scanning devices and depth cameras.
However, due to the limitations of the view angles of cam-*Corresponding author. This work was supported by National Key
R&D Program of China (2020YFF0304100, 2018YFB0505400), the Na-tional Natural Science Foundation of China (62072268), and in part by
Tsinghua-Kuaishou Institute of Future Media Data. era/scanning devices and self-occlusion, raw point clouds are often sparse, noisy and partial, which usually require shape completion before being analyzed in further appli-cations such as shape classiﬁcation [27, 14, 23, 21, 24], retrieval [11, 7, 12], semantic/instance segmentation [22, 39]. Although the recent data-driven supervised comple-tion methods [16, 46, 42, 44, 17, 20] have achieved impres-sive performance, they heavily rely on the paired training data, which consists of incomplete shapes and their corre-sponding complete ground truth. In real-world applications, however, such high quality and large-scale paired training dataset is not easy to access, which makes it hard to directly train a supervised completion network.
A promising but challenging solution to this problem is to learn a completion network in an unpaired way, where the common practice is to establish the shape correspondence between the incomplete shapes and complete ones from the unpaired training data without requiring the incomplete and complete correspondence. The latest work like Pcl2Pcl [2] introduced an adversarial framework to merge the geomet-ric gap between the complete shape distribution and incom-plete one in the latent representation space. Although many efforts have been made to learn the geometric correspon-dence from incomplete shapes to complete ones, previous methods ignore the inverse correspondence from complete shapes to incomplete ones, which leads to low completion accuracy due to the limited 3D shape understanding ability.
To address this problem, we propose a novel un-paired point cloud completion network, named Cy-cle4Completion, to establish the geometric correspondence between incomplete and complete shapes in both directions.
We achieve this by designing two cycle transformations, i.e. the incomplete cycle transformation (incomplete-cycle) and the complete cycle transformation (complete-cycle), as shown in Figure 1. The incomplete-cycle in Figure 1(a) learns the mapping from the incomplete domain to the com-13080
Figure 1. Illustration of cycle transformation, which consists of two inverse cycles, as shown in (a) and (b). The cycle transformation promotes network to understand 3D shapes by learning to generate complete or incomplete shapes from their complementary ones. network clarify which incomplete shape is the current target for transformation, and relieve the target confusion prob-lem. Our main contributions are summarized as follows.
• We propose a novel unpaired point cloud comple-tion network, named Cycle4Completion. Compared with previous unpaired completion methods which only consider the single-side correspondence from in-complete shapes to complete ones, Cycle4Completion can enhance the completion performance by establish-ing the geometric correspondence between complete shapes and incomplete shapes from both directions.
• We propose the cycle transformation framework in la-tent space, which is combined with the partial match-ing loss and cycle matching loss to establish the bidi-rectional geometric correspondence between the com-plete and incomplete shapes, and maintain the shape consistency throughout the whole transformation pro-cess.
• We propose the missing region coding to decompose the incomplete shape representation into a representa-tion of its corresponding complete shape, and a miss-ing region code to encode the missing regions of the incomplete shapes, respectively. This solves the target confusion when the network tries to predict multiple incomplete shapes based on a single complete shape. 2.