Abstract
In this paper, we delve into semi-supervised object detec-tion where unlabeled images are leveraged to break through the upper bound of fully-supervised object detection. Pre-vious semi-supervised methods based on pseudo labels are severely degenerated by noise and prone to overﬁt to noisy labels, thus are deﬁcient in learning different unlabeled knowledge well. To address this issue, we propose a data-uncertainty guided multi-phase learning method for semi-supervised object detection. We comprehensively consider divergent types of unlabeled images according to their dif-ﬁculty levels, utilize them in different phases, and ensemble models from different phases together to generate ultimate results. Image uncertainty guided easy data selection and region uncertainty guided RoI Re-weighting are involved in multi-phase learning and enable the detector to concentrate on more certain knowledge. Through extensive experiments on PASCAL VOC and MS COCO, we demonstrate that our method behaves extraordinarily compared to baseline ap-proaches and outperforms them by a large margin, more than 3% on VOC and 2% on COCO. 1.

Introduction
With the success of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [19, 22], object detection methods have been pro-moted rapidly in recent years. Plenty of object detection models [12, 11, 36, 34, 27] achieve superior performance on benchmark datasets [10, 26]. However, these models are heavily dependent on a large amount of fully-supervised data with complete category and bounding box annotations, which are labor-intensive to collect [20].
To address the preceding problems, semi-supervised ob-ject detection (SSOD) [37] receives much attention recently.
It exploits a large amount of unlabeled data to boost the performance of fully-supervised object detection, especially when only limited labeled data are available. Currently, many SSOD methods [33] are established on pseudo labels
*Corresponding author (a) (b)
Figure 1: Frameworks for previous pseudo-label based one-phase training (a) and our multi-phase method (b).
Image-level uncertainty based selection and region-level uncertainty based re-weighting guide our multi-phase learn-ing for handling noise in pseudo labels.
[23] and adopt the one-phase learning scheme in Fig. 1a.
With a pre-trained fully-supervised model on labeled im-ages, pseudo annotations of unlabeled images are obtained.
These pseudo labels are treated as groundtruth of unlabeled data and are integrated with annotations of labeled data to train the SSOD model.
Despite that the one-phase learning is somewhat effec-tive for SSOD, it is insufﬁcient for knowledge excavation to exploit the unlabeled data only once. The reason lies in the fact that noise is inherently attached to pseudo annotations.
Deep learning based models have the potential to ﬁt any training annotation, even the incorrect ones. When pseudo annotations are noisy with some false information, detec-tion models are also able to ”learn” to ﬁt them. This ﬁtting ability to incorrect annotations surpasses the representative 4568
learning for correct ones. We call this phenomenon as la-bel noise overﬁtting problem, which is also corroborated in previous studies [1, 50, 28]. As a result, SSOD models with one-phase learning tend to ﬁt the difﬁcult data with more noise, while neglecting the easy data with high conﬁdence.
The negative impacts of label noise overﬁtting are mainly two-fold. On the one hand, at image level, difﬁcult images with much noise preponderate during training, mak-ing the detector inﬂexible to employ unlabeled data with different difﬁculty levels. On the other hand, at region level, regions overlapped heavily with existing objects but lacking pseudo annotations incorporate much more noisy informa-tion and dominate the training, contributing extensive incor-rect gradient messages to SSOD training.
To tackle this, we describe the noisy labeled data with uncertainty and propose a data-uncertainty guided multi-phase learning for SSOD. At image level, we introduce the uncertainty to guide the image selection for different phases of training. In practice, we perform SSOD training on easy unlabeled images with low uncertainty ﬁrst, then continue with difﬁcult unlabeled images with high uncertainty. Dur-ing this process, we collect more than one model which ex-perts in images with different difﬁculty levels separately.
They cooperatively specialize all unlabeled images so we aggregate them together to complement each other for in-ference. At region level, we measure the uncertainty of background regions based on their similarity and overlaps with each other. We further conduct RoI re-weighting by the guidance of region uncertainty degrees and involve it in the multi-phase training. This RoI re-weighting strategy reduces weights for uncertain regions and forces detection models to pay more attention to certain regions.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose an uncertainty guided multi-phase SSOD learning method. With image-uncertainty based selec-tion, we alleviate attention imbalance on different dif-ﬁculty levels of data and are capable of ﬁtting all unla-beled images well.
• We introduce a region-uncertainty based RoI re-weighting strategy to guide multi-phase learning and assist the detector in focusing on more certain regions.
• On the PASCAL VOC and MS COCO dataset, our method reaches 78.6% and 42.3%, which exceeds the state-of-the-art by 2.4%, 2.2%, respectively. 2.