Abstract
In this paper, we propose HESIC, an end-to-end trainable deep network for stereo image compression (SIC). To fully explore the mutual information across two stereo images, we use a deep regression model to estimate the homography matrix, i.e., H matrix. Then, the left image is spatially trans-formed by the H matrix, and only the residual information between the left and right images is encoded to save bit-rates. A two-branch auto-encoder architecture is adopted in
HESIC, corresponding to the left and right images, respec-tively. For entropy coding, we use two conditional stereo entropy models, i.e., Gaussian mixture model (GMM) based and context based entropy models, to fully explore the corre-lation between the two images to reduce the coding bit-rates.
In decoding, a cross quality enhancement module is proposed to enhance the image quality based on inverse H matrix. Ex-perimental results show that our HESIC outperforms state-of-the-art SIC methods on InStereo2K and KITTI datasets both quantitatively and qualitatively. Code is available at https://github.com/ywz978020607/HESIC. 1.

Introduction
Stereo image compression (SIC) aims to jointly compress a pair of stereoscopic left and right images, to achieve high
In the ﬁelds compression rate for both the two images. of autonomous driving [45], virtual reality [19] and video surveillance [12], SIC has become one of the most criti-cal techniques, which recently attracts increasing attention from both academic and industrial communities. By fully exploiting the mutual information in the two images, SIC can potentially achieve higher compression rate than com-pressing each image independently.
Compared with single image compression [4], SIC is more challenging, which needs to fully exploit and utilize
*Corresponding author.
Input L 
Input R 
...
Bitstream 
...
H
H
.
.
.
.
.
.
Output L 
Output R 
Encoder 
Decoder 
Figure 1. Brief framework of the proposed HESIC approach for stereo image compression. Here, the “H” indicates homography transformation. the inner relationship between the left and right stereo im-ages. There have been many research works on traditional stereo image compression [18, 8, 27]. However, they rely on hand-crafted features and the traditional optimization theory to minimize the rate-distortion loss, which have limited com-pression efﬁciency. Recently, Liu et al. [32] proposed the
ﬁrst deep learning based stereo image compression method named DSIC, which exploits the content redundancy be-tween the stereo pair to reduce the joint bit-rate. However, it has very high computational complexity due to the dense warp scheme. In addition, it requires that the left and right images must stand in the same horizontal line, which is actually not feasible in practical applications.
In this paper, we propose an efﬁcient stereo image com-pression network based on homography transformation, namely HESIC, which overcomes all the aforementioned drawbacks of DSIC. As shown in Fig. 1, we use homography transformation [35] to replace the dense warp module in
DSIC [32], which can signiﬁcantly decrease the computa-tional complexity. In addition, since homography transfor-mation has no requirement for the relative position of the two images, our method can cope with the case when the two stereo images are not in the same horizontal line. Finally, our
HESIC approach not only outperforms the state-of-the-art 1492
deep learning based single image compression methods, but also saves around 31.7% bit-rate compared to the latest SIC method DSIC with similar image quality.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We propose a novel stereo image compression network based on homography transformation, namely HESIC, for the task of stereo image compression.
• We introduce two conditional entropy models specif-ically for stereo image compression, aiming to fully reduce the redundancy between two stereo images.
• We develop a cross quality enhancement module in the decoder, which is able to enhance the image quality using inverse homography matrix. 2.