Abstract
Active Surface Models have a long history of being useful to model complex 3D surfaces. But only Active
Contours have been used in conjunction with deep networks, and then only to produce the data term as well as meta-parameter maps controlling them. In this paper, we advocate a much tighter integration. We introduce layers that implement them that can be integrated seamlessly into
Graph Convolutional Networks to enforce sophisticated smoothness priors at an acceptable computational cost.
We will show that the resulting Deep Active Surface that use
Models outperform equivalent architectures traditional regularization loss terms to impose smoothness priors for 3D surface reconstruction from 2D images and for 3D volume segmentation. 1.

Introduction
Triangulated meshes are one of the most popular and
In recent versatile kind of 3D surface representation. years, one of the most popular approaches to inferring such representations from images has been to use deep networks to produce a volumetric representation and then running a marching-cube style algorithm to create the mesh. However, using marching-cubes tends to introduce artifacts and introduces additional complexities when trying to make the process end-to-end differentiable. Hence, deep-learning methods that go directly and without resorting to an intermediate stage from 2D images [40, 32, 41] and 3D image stacks [42] to 3D triangulated surfaces have recently been proposed.
Unfortunately, these direct methods are also prone to generating unwanted artifacts such as those shown at the top of Fig. 1. State-of-the-art methods handle them by introducing additional regularizing loss terms such as the edge length loss, the normal consistency loss, or the
Laplacian loss during training [14]. To be effective without sacriﬁcing reconstruction accuracy, these terms must be carefully weighted, which is typically difﬁcult to achieve.
Figure 1: Smoothness and Accuracy. (Top) 3D surface meshes of a couch modeled from an RGB image and of a synaptic connection segmented from an electron microscopy stack by Mesh
R-CNN [14] and by Vox2Mesh [42], two state-of-the-art mesh-generating methods. (Bottom) Results using the same backbones augmented by our DASM smoothing layers. The meshes have far fewer artifacts and we will show that they are also more accurate.
In this paper, we solve this problem by introducing into the surface generating architecture a special-purpose layer that regularize the meshes using a semi-implicit scheme that involves recursively solving sparse linear systems of linear equations. It propagates smoothness constraints much faster and more reliably than traditional gradient descent-based energy minimization without requiring much computational power and yields surface meshes that ﬁt the data while remaining smooth, such as those shown at the bottom of
Fig. 1. Furthermore, this scheme enables us to
• modulate locally the amount of regularization we impose so that we regularize only where it is needed and, hence, preserve accuracy;
• use meshes consisting of vertices with arbitrary 11652
degrees which is not commonly seen in majority of
Active Shape Models.
Both of these are important to model complex 3D objects that can be smooth in some places and very curvy elsewhere.
We took our inspiration from the Active Surface Models (ASMs) idea [38, 39], which were ﬁrst introduced over 30 years ago and also used a semi-implicit optimization scheme to model complex 3D shapes from images. Today, they are mostly used in conjunction with deep networks that are used to compute the data term that is minimized when deforming the models and meta-parameter maps that controls its behavior [27, 10]. Even though these methods are end-to-end trainable, they do not embed the ASMs within the contour deforming graph convolution networks as we do. Furthermore, they are limited to 2D contours whereas we handle irregular 3D surface meshes, that is, meshes whose vertices can be of arbitrary degrees. To this end, we propose an original method to compute the derivatives required for back-propagation on such a mesh.
Our contribution therefore is Deep Active Surface
Models (DASMs) that outperform equivalent architectures in which the smoothness constraints are imposed by minimizing a traditional loss function. We will demonstrate this for 3D surface reconstruction from 2D images and for 3D volume segmentation. 2.