Abstract
Point set is a ﬂexible and lightweight representation widely used for 3D deep learning. However, their discrete nature prevents them from representing continuous and ﬁne geometry, posing a major issue for learning-based shape generation. In this work, we turn the discrete point sets into smooth surfaces by introducing the well-known implicit moving least-squares (IMLS) surface formulation, which nat-urally deﬁnes locally implicit functions on point sets. We incorporate IMLS surface generation into deep neural net-works for inheriting both the ﬂexibility of point sets and the high quality of implicit surfaces. Our IMLSNet pre-dicts an octree structure as a scaffold for generating MLS points where needed and characterizes shape geometry with learned local priors. Furthermore, our implicit function eval-uation is independent of the neural network once the MLS points are predicted, thus enabling fast runtime evaluation.
Our experiments on 3D object reconstruction demonstrate that IMLSNets outperform state-of-the-art learning-based methods in terms of reconstruction quality and computa-tional efﬁciency. Extensive ablation tests also validate our network design and loss functions. 1.

Introduction
Point set is probably the most widely used representation for 3D deep learning. Compared with other 3D represen-tations like polygonal meshes and volumetric grids, point sets are naturally embedded as neurons in DNNs, easy to acquire, have minimal extra structure to maintain, capture complex geometry and topology dynamically, and induce no wasted computation for free-space regions. Indeed, point sets have been used in the deep learning-based 3D analysis for diverse tasks [20,39,40]. However, when using point sets for the generation of 3D data by deep learning, we have the
ﬂexibility to model changing topology and complex surfaces on one hand, but also suffer from the discrete and rough geometry on the other hand.
Recent works have focused on generating shapes in the forms of meshes and polygonal patches, but their shape representation abilities are still restricted by their discrete and non-smooth nature. The deep implicit function ap-proaches [9, 32, 36], instead, deﬁne smooth functions on entire 3D domains to guarantee result continuity, and have shown to be promising for high-quality 3D reconstruction.
However, the implicit surface generation is inefﬁcient, be-cause for each point in the 3D domain the network has to be evaluated individually before the surface can be extracted.
In this paper, we combine the advantages of both the implicit function approaches and the point set methods, by extending the point set representation to model implicit surfaces for high-quality 3D generation, while preserving the inherent
ﬂexibility and computational efﬁciency of explicit point sets.
For modeling smooth surfaces via point sets, we adopt point set surfaces [2] and use moving least-squares (MLS) interpolation of the points to deﬁne locally implicit functions over a narrow band region of the point set. Speciﬁcally for the implicit MLS formulation [27] used in this paper, for any spatial point inside the narrow region, the implicit
MLS function maps it to a signed distance value to the zero level set surface, deﬁned by the weighted blending of signed distances to oriented planes supported at the nearby points; the zero level set surface can then be extracted as a smooth and continuous surface for shape representation.
While MLS surfaces have been well studied in 3D re-construction and rendering [10], to incorporate the repre-sentation into a deep learning framework poses novel chal-lenges and opportunities unseen in existing point-set-based or implicit-representation-based methods. First, the points deﬁne implicit MLS surfaces most effectively when they are dense enough and distributed evenly over the shapes to reconstruct. While most point generation approaches ﬁx the number of points and consume many resources for the straightforward prediction of dense points that are hard to generalize, we introduce an octree-based scaffolding for gen-erating variable numbers of MLS points only where needed according to the target shape (cf. Fig. 1), and further regular-ize the point distribution via tailored loss functions. Second, 11788
Figure 1: Illustration of our deep implicit MLS surface gen-eration method. Left: the network decoder produces a set of oriented points scaffolded by an octree (2 points for each non-empty leaf octant in this example), which deﬁnes an implicit zero level set surface that is the target shape for shape generation. Right: an example of the reconstructed bunny shape from 3D points via an implicit MLS. to measure the predicted implicit functions for both training supervision and test evaluation, while existing implicit meth-ods [9, 32, 36, 38] have to use dense sampling over the whole 3D domain, the MLS surface is naturally localized inside the narrow band region of generated points, which prompts us to use more succinct sampling only at the octree nodes for supervision and evaluation. Also, the evaluation is indepen-dent of the network once all MLS points are embedded in the 3D domain, thus avoiding the costly per-point network evaluation that is typical of other implicit methods.
We use extensive ablation tests to validate the design choices made. We also demonstrate that our deep implicit
MLS surface approach outperforms both the point set gen-eration methods and other global or local implicit function methods, through the 3D object reconstruction task. 2.