Abstract
In coded aperture snapshot spectral imaging (CASSI) system, the real-world hyperspectral image (HSI) can be re-constructed from the captured compressive image in a snap-shot. Model-based HSI reconstruction methods employed hand-crafted priors to solve the reconstruction problem, but most of which achieved limited success due to the poor rep-resentation capability of these hand-crafted priors. Deep learning based methods learning the mappings between the compressive images and the HSIs directly achieved much better results. Yet, it is nontrivial to design a powerful deep network heuristically for achieving satisﬁed results. In this paper, we propose a novel HSI reconstruction method based on the Maximum a Posterior (MAP) estimation framework using learned Gaussian Scale Mixture (GSM) prior. Dif-ferent from existing GSM models using hand-crafted scale priors (e.g., the Jeffrey’s prior), we propose to learn the scale prior through a deep convolutional neural network (DCNN). Furthermore, we also propose to estimate the lo-cal means of the GSM models by the DCNN. All the pa-rameters of the MAP estimation algorithm and the DCNN parameters are jointly optimized through end-to-end train-ing. Extensive experimental results on both synthetic and real datasets demonstrate that the proposed method outper-forms existing state-of-the-art methods. The code is avail-able at https://see.xidian.edu.cn/faculty/ wsdong/Projects/DGSM-SCI.htm. 1.

Introduction
Compared with traditional RGB images, hyperspectral images (HSIs) have more spectral bands and can describe the characteristics of material in the imaged scene more ac-curately. Relying on its rich spectral information, HSIs are beneﬁcial to many computer vision tasks, e.g., object recog-nition [33], detection [40] and tracking [34]. The conven-* Corresponding authors.
Figure 1. A single shot measurement captured by [22] and 28 re-constructed spectral channels using our proposed method. tional imaging systems with single 1D or 2D sensor require a long time to scan the scene, failing to capture dynamic objects. Recently, many coded aperture snapshot spectral imaging (CASSI) systems [8, 22, 23, 35] have been pro-posed to capture the 3D HSIs at video rate. CASSI utilizes a physical mask and a disperser to modulate different wave-length signals, and mixes all modulated signals to generate a single 2D compressive image. Then a reconstruction al-gorithm is employed to reconstruct the 3D HSI from the 2D compressive image. As shown in Fig. 1, 28 spectral band-s have been reconstructed from a 2D compressive image (measurement) captured by a real CASSI system [22].
Therefore, reconstruction algorithms play a pivot role in
CASSI. To solve this ill-posed inverse problem, previous model-based methods adopted hand-crafted priors to regu-larize the reconstruction process. In GAP-TV [43], the total variation prior was introduced to solve the HSI reconstruc-tion problem. Based on the assumption that HSIs have s-parse representations with respective to some dictionaries, sparse-based methods [14, 17, 35] exploited the ℓ1 sparsi-ty to regularize the solution. Considering that the pixels of 16216
HSIs have strong long-range dependence, non-local based methods [18, 38, 48] have also been proposed. However, the model-based methods have to tweak parameters manu-ally, resulting in limited reconstruction quality in addition to the slow reconstruction speed. Inspired by the successes of deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) for natu-ral image restoration [16, 47], deep learning based HSI re-construction methods [3, 36, 37] have also been proposed.
In [36], an iterative HSI reconstruction algorithm was un-folded into a DCNN, where two sub-networks were used to exploit the spatial-spectral priors. In [37] the nonlocal self-similarity prior has also been incorporated to further im-prove the results. In addition to the optimization-inspired methods, DCNN-based methods [22, 24, 41] that learned the mapping functions between the 2D measurements and the 3D HSIs directly have also been proposed. λ-net [24] reconstructed the HSIs from the inputs of 2D measurements and the mask through a two-stage DCNN. TSA-Net [22] in-tegrated three spatial-spectral self-attention modules in the backbone U-Net [31] and achieved state-of-the-art result-s. Although promising HSI reconstruction performance has been achieved, it is non-trivial to design a powerful DCNN heuristically.
Bearing the above concerns in mind, in this paper, we propose an interpretable HSI reconstruction method with learned Gaussian Scale Mixture (GSM) prior. The contri-butions of this paper are listed as follows.
• Learned GSM models are proposed to exploit the spatial-spectral correlations of HSIs. Unlike the exist-ing GSM models with hand-crafted scale priors (e.g.,
Jeffrey’s prior), we propose to learn the scale prior by a DCNN.
• The local means of the GSM models are estimated as a weighted average of the spatial-spectral neighboring pixels. The spatial-spectral similarity weights are also estimated by the DCNN.
• The HSI reconstruction problem is formulated as a
Maximum a Posteriori (MAP) estimation problem with the learned GSM models. All the parameters in the MAP estimator are jointly optimized in an end-to-end manner.
• Extensive experimental results on both synthetic and real datasets show that the proposed method out-performs existing state-of-the-art HSI reconstruction methods. 2.