Abstract
We present a novel method for efﬁcient acquisition of shape and spatially varying reﬂectance of 3D objects us-ing polarization cues. Unlike previous works that have ex-ploited polarization to estimate material or object appear-ance under certain constraints (known shape or multiview acquisition), we lift such restrictions by coupling polariza-tion imaging with deep learning to achieve high quality estimate of 3D object shape (surface normals and depth) and SVBRDF using single-view polarization imaging under frontal ﬂash illumination. In addition to acquired polariza-tion images, we provide our deep network with strong novel cues related to shape and reﬂectance, in the form of a nor-malized Stokes map and an estimate of diffuse color. We additionally describe modiﬁcations to network architecture and training loss which provide further qualitative improve-ments. We demonstrate our approach to achieve superior results compared to recent works employing deep learning in conjunction with ﬂash illumination. 1.

Introduction
In this work, we extend practical acquisition of shape and spatially varying reﬂectance of 3D objects. Accurately ac-quiring the shape and appearance of real-world objects and materials has been an active area of research in vision and graphics with a wide range of applications including anal-ysis/recognition, and digitization for visual effects, games, virtual reality, cultural heritage, advertising or design for example. Advances in digital imaging over the last two decades has resulted in image-based acquisition techniques becoming an integral component of appearance modeling and 3D reconstruction. A recent trend has been towards making acquisition more practical, employing commodity off-the-shelf equipment and more recently relying on min-imalistic capture coupled with advances in deep learning techniques.
Our method allows to better recover appearance by lever-aging deep learning and additional photometric cues. Sim-ilar to the recent works that employ deep learning for 3D object appearance capture [25, 7], we employ acquisition under frontal ﬂash illumination. However, compared to previous work, we additionally leverage polarization imag-ing and exploit polarization cues in conjunction with deep learning.
The recent work of Ba et al. [4] proposed a similar ap-proach to estimate surface normals of homogeneous 3D objects under uncontrolled environment illumination. We show that arbitrary environment illumination can limit the quality of polarization signal and describe how ﬂash illu-mination solves this problem, resulting in high quality sur-face normal estimate. Furthermore, our method can pro-cess non homogeneous objects and estimates a physically based spatially-varying BRDF of higher quality than previ-ous methods [25, 7].
We create a new HDR synthetic dataset simulating po-larization behaviour on different geometries and SVBRDFs and train an improved deep network inspired by Deschain-tre et al. and Li et al. [11, 25]. Observing the polariza-tion information of a 3D object from a single view direc-tion under frontal ﬂash illumination, our method estimates the 3D shape as surface normal and depth maps and spa-tially varying reﬂectance properties as diffuse and specular albedo maps and specular roughness map which enable high quality renderings of acquired objects under novel lighting conditions.
To summarize, in this paper we make the following con-tributions:
• We propose the ﬁrst method for joint 3D shape and
SVBRDF estimation combining polarization cues (un-der ﬂash illumination) and deep learning.
• We publish a new synthetic dataset with diffuse polar-ization effects for supervised learning.
• Analysis of polarization cues under different lighting and practical acquisition protocol for high quality re-sults.
• An improved deep network architecture and training loss for 3D object appearance acquisition. 115567
2.