Abstract 1.

Introduction
We propose a novel Deformed Implicit Field (DIF) rep-resentation for modeling 3D shapes of a category and gen-erating dense correspondences among shapes. With DIF, a 3D shape is represented by a template implicit ﬁeld shared across the category, together with a 3D deformation ﬁeld and a correction ﬁeld dedicated for each shape instance.
Shape correspondences can be easily established using their deformation ﬁelds. Our neural network, dubbed DIF-Net, jointly learns a shape latent space and these ﬁelds for 3D objects belonging to a category without using any corre-spondence or part label. The learned DIF-Net can also pro-vides reliable correspondence uncertainty measurement re-ﬂecting shape structure discrepancy. Experiments show that
DIF-Net not only produces high-ﬁdelity 3D shapes but also builds high-quality dense correspondences across different shapes. We also demonstrate several applications such as texture transfer and shape editing, where our method achieves compelling results that cannot be achieved by pre-vious methods. 1
*This work was done when Yu Deng was an intern at MSRA. 1Code URL: https://github.com/microsoft/DIF-Net. 3D objects in a same class share some common shape features and semantic correspondences, which can be used to construct a deformable shape model beneﬁcial for a di-verse array of downstream tasks in 3D and 2D domains such as shape understanding [35, 2], reconstruction [56, 10, 70], manipulation [8, 28], and image synthesis [57, 62, 55].
Learning a 3D shape model with dense correspondences is a longstanding task in computer vision and graphics.
However, existing works mostly focus on object classes with consistent geometric topologies such as human face and body [8, 61, 36, 40, 71]. Shapes in these object cate-gories can be pre-aligned for 3D model construction. Re-cent deep learning based approaches directly learn a latent space of 3D objects [63, 53, 1, 44]. Although these meth-ods can model complex objects, they do not deal with dense correspondences between 3D shapes.
In this paper, we investigate learning model of 3D shapes and their dense correspondences for more generic objects such as cars and chairs. Compared to human face and body, these object classes exhibit much larger shape varia-tions and structure changes, rendering correspondence con-10286
struction extremely challenging. For these object cate-gories, even human cannot reliably label the dense corre-spondences between two arbitrary shapes.
To achieve this goal, we act on recent advances in deep implicit ﬁelds, which have shown extraordinary power of representing complicated 3D geometry [42, 44, 15, 49], and propose a novel Deformed Implicit Field (DIF) representa-tion for joint shape latent space and dense correspondence learning. With DIF, a 3D shape is represented by a template implicit ﬁeld, shared across the category, together with a 3D deformation ﬁeld and a scalar correction ﬁeld, dedicated for each shape instance. The output implicit ﬁeld of a shape can be constructed by deforming the template implicit ﬁeld and applying correction. The deformation ﬁeld serves as a shape alignment function, with which dense correspon-dence between two shapes can be established by deforming their surfaces to the aligned 3D space. The correction ﬁeld is introduced to handle structure variations among shapes.
We apply a neural network called DIF-Net to learn these
ﬁelds together given a collection of shapes. To achieve un-supervised correspondence learning without any label, our key observation is that the normal direction of a shape point is highly correlated to its semantic information and very useful for correspondence reasoning.
In light of this, we simply enforce the normals of two corresponding points
In addition, we connected by deformation to be close. impose a spatial smoothness constrain on the deformation
ﬁelds and enforce the correction ﬁelds to be minimal to make it only focus on dealing with structure variations.
Thorough qualitative and quantitative evaluations show that our DIF-Net trained in this way can produce high quality correspondences. Moreover, correspondence uncertainty reﬂecting structure discrepancy between two shapes can be reliably measured by our method.
The contribution of this paper is as follows:
• We propose DIF, a novel implicit ﬁeld based 3D shape representation for shapes of an object category.
• We propose DIF-Net, the ﬁrst method devoted to 3D shape modeling with dense correspondences learned in an unsupervised fashion for objects with structure variation.
• We show that our method can achieve high-quality dense correspondences and compelling texture trans-fer and shape editing results that cannot be achieved by previous methods. We believe our method can be applied in a wide range of 3D shape analysis and ma-nipulation tasks. 2.