Abstract
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection, inferring the relationships between human and objects from im-ages/videos, is a fundamental task for high-level scene un-derstanding. However, HOI detection usually suffers from the open long-tailed nature of interactions with objects, while human has extremely powerful compositional percep-tion ability to cognize rare or unseen HOI samples.
In-spired by this, we devise a novel HOI compositional learn-ing framework, termed as Fabricated Compositional Learn-ing (FCL), to address the problem of open long-tailed HOI detection. Speciﬁcally, we introduce an object fabricator to generate effective object representations, and then com-bine verbs and fabricated objects to compose new HOI sam-ples. With the proposed object fabricator, we are able to generate large-scale HOI samples for rare and unseen cat-egories to alleviate the open long-tailed issues in HOI de-tection. Extensive experiments on the most popular HOI detection dataset, HICO-DET, demonstrate the effective-ness of the proposed method for imbalanced HOI detection and signiﬁcantly improve the state-of-the-art performance on rare and unseen HOI categories. Code is available at https://github.com/zhihou7/HOI-CL. 1.

Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection, which aims to localize and infer relationships between human and ob-jects in images/videos, hhuman, verb, objecti, is an es-sential step towards deeper scene and action understand-ing [7, 13].
In real-world scenarios, long-tailed distribu-tions are common for the data perceived by human vision system, e.g., actions/verbs and objects [39]. The combina-torial nature of HOI further highlights the issues of long-tailed distributions in HOI detection, while human can efﬁ-Figure 1. Open long-tailed HOI detection addresses the problem of imbalanced learning and zero-shot learning in a uniﬁed way. We propose to compose new HOIs for open long-tailed HOI detection.
Speciﬁcally, the blurred HOIs, e.g., “ride bear”, are composite.
See more examples in supplementary materials. ciently learn to recognize seen and even unseen HOIs from limited samples. An intuitive example of open long-tailed
HOI detection is shown in Figure 1, in which one can eas-ily recognize the unseen action “ride bear”, nevertheless it never even happened. However, existing HOI detection ap-proaches usually focus on either the head [13, 36, 57], the tail [62] or unseen categories [48, 43], leaving the problem of open long-tailed HOI detection poorly investigated.
Open long-tailed HOI detection falls into the category of the long-tailed zero-shot learning problem, which is usually referred into several isolated problems, including long-tailed learning [26, 22], few-shot learning [10, 52], zero-shot learning [33]. To address the problem of im-balanced training data, existing methods mainly focus on three strategies: 1) re-sampling [9, 19, 27]; 2) re-weighted loss functions [8, 5, 21]; and 3) knowledge transfer [58, 39, 10, 33, 47, 11]. Speciﬁcally, re-sampling and re-weighted loss functions are usually designed for imbalance prob-lem, while knowledge transfer is introduced to relieve all the long-tailed [58], few-shot [49], and zero-shot prob-lem [61, 11]. Recently, two popular knowledge transfer methods have received increasing attention from the com-14646
Figure 2. Illustration of distribution of the number of object box in HICO-DET dataset. The categories are sorted by the number of instances. munity, data generation [58, 57, 61, 39, 10, 33, 47, 29] (transferring head/base classes to tail/unseen classes) and visual-semantic embedding [11, 42] (transferring from lan-guage knowledge). Along the ﬁrst way, we address the problem of open long-tailed HOI detection from the per-spective of HOI generation.
Unlike the samples in typical long-tailed zero-shot learn-ing for visual recognition, each HOI sample is composed of a verb and an object, and different HOIs may share the same verb or object (e.g., “ride bike” and “ride horse”). In cognitive science, human perceives concepts as the com-positions of shareable components [4, 23] (e.g., verb and object in HOI), which indicates that human can conceive a new concept through a composition of existing compo-nents. Inspired by this, several zero-and few-shot HOI de-tection approaches have been proposed to enforce the fac-tored primitive (verb and object) representation of the same primitive class to be similar among different HOIs, such as factorized model [48, 3] and factor visual-language model
[62, 43, 3]. However, regularizing factor representation, i.e. enforcing the same verb/object representation to be similar among different HOIs, is only sub-optimal for HOI detec-tion. Recently, Hou et al. [24] present to compose novel
HOI samples via combining decomposed verbs and objects between pair-wise images and within image. Nevertheless, it still remains a great challenge to compose massive HOI samples in each minibatch from images due to limited num-ber of HOIs in each image, especially when the distribution of objects/verbs is also long-tailed. We demonstrate the dis-tribution of the number of objects in Figure 2.
The long-tailed distribution of objects/verbs makes it difﬁcult to compose new HOIs from each mini-batch, signiﬁcantly degrading the performance of compositional learning-based methods for rare and zero-shot HOI detec-tion [24]. Inspired by recent success of visual object repre-sentation generation [61, 20, 57], we thus apply fabricated object representation, instead of fabricated verb representa-tion, to compose more balanced HOIs. We referred to the proposed compositional learning framework with fabricated object representation as Fabricated Compositional Learning or FCL. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst extract verb representations from input images, and then design a simple yet efﬁcient object fabricator to generate object representation. Next, the generated visual object features are further combined with the verb features to compose new HOI samples. With the proposed object fabricator, we are able to generate balanced objects for each verb within the mini-batch of training data as well as compose massive balanced HOI training samples.
The main contributions of this paper can be summa-rized as follows: 1) proposing to compose HOI samples for Open Long-Tailed HOI detection; 2) designing an ob-ject fabricator to generate objects for HOI composition; 3) signiﬁcantly outperforming recent state-of-the-art methods on HICO-DET dataset among rare and unseen categories. 2.