Abstract
We present a probabilistic model for point cloud gen-eration, which is fundamental for various 3D vision tasks such as shape completion, upsampling, synthesis and data augmentation.
Inspired by the diffusion process in non-equilibrium thermodynamics, we view points in point clouds as particles in a thermodynamic system in contact with a heat bath, which diffuse from the original distribu-tion to a noise distribution. Point cloud generation thus amounts to learning the reverse diffusion process that trans-forms the noise distribution to the distribution of a desired shape. Speciﬁcally, we propose to model the reverse dif-fusion process for point clouds as a Markov chain condi-tioned on certain shape latent. We derive the variational bound in closed form for training and provide implemen-tations of the model. Experimental results demonstrate that our model achieves competitive performance in point cloud generation and auto-encoding. The code is available at https://github.com/luost26/diffusion-point-cloud. 1.

Introduction
With recent advances in depth sensing and laser scan-ning, point clouds have attracted increasing attention as a popular representation for modeling 3D shapes. Signif-icant progress has been made in developing methods for point cloud analysis, such as classiﬁcation and segmenta-tion [16, 17, 23]. On the other hand, learning generative models for point clouds is powerful in unsupervised rep-resentation learning to characterize the data distribution, which lays the foundation for various tasks such as shape completion, upsampling, synthesis, etc.
Generative models such as variational auto-encoders (VAEs), generative adversarial networks (GANs), normal-*Corresponding author: Wei Hu (forhuwei@pku.edu.cn). This work was supported by the National Key R&D project of China under contract
No. 2019YFF0302903 and National Natural Science Foundation of China under contract No. 61972009.
Figure 1. Top: The diffusion process that converts noise to some shape (left to right). Middle: Generated point clouds from the proposed model. Bottom: Latent space interpolation between the two point clouds at both ends. izing ﬂows, etc., have shown great success in image gen-eration [13, 8, 5, 6]. However, these powerful tools can-not be directly generalized to point clouds, due to the ir-regular sampling patterns of points in the 3D space in con-trast to regular grid structures underlying images. Hence, learning generative models for point clouds is quite chal-lenging. Prior research has explored point cloud generation via GANs [1, 22, 19], auto-regressive models [21], ﬂow-based models [25] and so on. While remarkable progress has been made, these methods have some inherent limita-tions for modeling point clouds. For instance, the training procedure could be unstable for GANs due to the adver-sarial losses. Auto-regressive models assume a generation ordering which is unnatural and might restrict the model’s
ﬂexibility.
In this paper, we propose a probabilistic generative model for point clouds inspired by non-equilibrium thermo-dynamics, exploiting the reverse diffusion process to learn the point distribution. As a point cloud is composed of dis-crete points in the 3D space, we regard these points as parti-cles in a non-equilibrium thermodynamic system in contact with a heat bath. Under the effect of the heat bath, the posi-tion of particles evolves stochastically in the way that they 2837
diffuse and eventually spread over the space. This process is termed the diffusion process that converts the initial dis-tribution of the particles to a simple noise distribution by adding noise at each time step [12, 20]. Analogously, we connect the point distribution of point clouds to a noise dis-tribution via the diffusion process. Naturally, in order to model the point distribution for point cloud generation, we consider the reverse diffusion process, which recovers the target point distribution from the noise distribution.
In particular, we model this reverse diffusion process as a Markov chain that converts the noise distribution into the target distribution. Our goal is to learn its transition ker-nel such that the Markov chain can reconstruct the desired shape. Further, as the purpose of the Markov chain is mod-eling the point distribution, the Markov chain alone is in-capable to generate point clouds of various shapes. To this end, we introduce a shape latent as the condition for the transition kernel. In the setting of generation, the shape la-tent follows a prior distribution which we parameterize via normalizing ﬂows [5, 6] for strong model expressiveness.
In the setting of auto-encoding, the shape latent is learned end-to-end. Finally, we formulate the training objective as maximizing the variational lower bound of the likelihood of the point cloud conditional on the shape latent, which is further formulated into tractable expressions in closed form. We apply our model to point cloud generation, auto-encoding and unsupervised representation learning, and re-sults demonstrate that our model achieves competitive per-formance on point cloud generation and auto-encoding and comparable results on unsupervised representation learning.
Our main contributions include:
• We propose a novel probabilistic generative model for point clouds, inspired by the diffusion process in non-equilibrium thermodynamics.
• We derive a tractable training objective from the vari-ational lower bound of the likelihood of point clouds conditioned on some shape latent.
• Extensive experiments show that our model achieves competitive performance in point cloud generation and auto-encoding. 2.