Abstract
Mechanical image stabilization using actuated gimbals enables capturing long-exposure shots without suffering from blur due to camera motion. These devices, however, are often physically cumbersome and expensive, limiting their widespread use.
In this work, we propose to digi-tally emulate a mechanically stabilized system from the in-put of a fast unstabilized camera. To exploit the trade-off between motion blur at long exposures and low SNR at short exposures, we train a CNN that estimates a sharp high-SNR image by aggregating a burst of noisy short-exposure frames, related by unknown motion. We further suggest learning the burst’s exposure times in an end-to-end man-ner, thus balancing the noise and blur across the frames. We demonstrate this method’s advantage over the traditional approach of deblurring a single image or denoising a ﬁxed-exposure burst on both synthetic and real data. 1.

Introduction
Through advances in imaging technology, optical sys-tems have become lighter and more portable than ever.
These improvements, however, are sometimes negated by the need for stabilization. Due to the natural tremor of handheld cameras, or the movement of mounted vehicles, camera motion is often unavoidable. As a result, images captured this way may suffer from motion blur, which is especially evident during long exposures or with long fo-cal lengths. Image stabilization, the task of mitigating this phenomenon, has been mostly explored in the optical and mechanical domains.
In the optical regime, stabilization emerges from using high-cost, uniquely tailored lenses or cheaper but less effective shift sensors. On the other hand, mechanical stabilization devices, such as actuated gimbals, can be attached to any camera with no need for complicated optical equipment. Such systems are highly popular but (a) Full-exposure image (b) DeblurGAN-v2 [17] (c) KPN [19] (d) Ours
Figure 1. A qualitative evaluation of our approach on images cap-tured by a vibrating camera with a long focal length. (See the sup-plement for a description of our setup.) The fully-exposed image (a) suffers from considerable motion blur, which is hard to mit-igate using image deblurring methods (b). Employing the same time budget to capture a ﬁxed-exposure burst and merging it via a burst denoising algorithm (c) results in over-smoothing and ghost-ing artifacts. Our approach (d) of learning a non-uniform exposure regime enables utilizing the sharpness of short-exposed frames and the high SNR of long-exposed ones to yield a superior reconstruc-tion. limited in their ability to compensate for blur due to scene motion or atmospheric turbulence. However, the most se-vere limitation of mechanical image stabilization is its cost, form factor, weight, and power requirements, which might be prohibitive in many scenarios. 11936
In recent years, deep learning approaches have been suc-cessfully utilized for solving traditional image processing tasks. The ﬁeld of burst and multi-frame imaging, in par-ticular, has seen rising attention, with a variety of works on denoising [19] and deblurring [1, 29]. These methods ex-ploit the information entangled in different degraded real-izations of the same scene to reassemble them into a single high-quality image. Relying on this concept, together with the well-known trade-off between strong blur at long expo-sures and low SNR at short exposures, we propose solving the image stabilization task using a burst of images, each captured consecutively over a short period. Thus we reduce the problem to joint burst denoising and deblurring, as the two are already well-established. While most burst meth-ods assume the data across the burst are complementary, we further suggest explicitly intervening in the acquisition pipeline and forcing diversity in noise and blur levels. We achieve this by designing an end-to-end learned system that includes both a deep burst image processing network and the camera’s exposure conﬁguration. The latter is imple-mented using a novel network layer that numerically models the frame acquisition process, and can potentially be further tuned for other imaging tasks. To the best of our knowledge, this approach has never been attempted before for still im-age reconstruction from SNR-limited bursts in the presence of camera motion. 2.