Abstract
A practical long-term tracker typically contains three key properties, i.e. an efﬁcient model design, an effective global re-detection strategy and a robust distractor aware-ness mechanism. However, most state-of-the-art long-term trackers (e.g., Pseudo and re-detecting based ones) do not take all three key properties into account and therefore may either be time-consuming or drift to distractors. To ad-dress the issues, we propose a two-task tracking frame-work (named DMTrack), which utilizes two core compo-nents (i.e., one-shot detection and re-identiﬁcation (re-id) association) to achieve distractor-aware fast tracking via
Dynamic convolutions (d-convs) and Multiple object track-ing (MOT) philosophy. To achieve precise and fast global detection, we construct a lightweight one-shot detector us-ing a novel dynamic convolutions generation method, which provides a uniﬁed and more ﬂexible way for fusing target information into the search ﬁeld. To distinguish the tar-get from distractors, we resort to the philosophy of MOT to reason distractors explicitly by maintaining all potential similarities’ tracklets. Beneﬁted from the strength of high recall detection and explicit object association, our tracker achieves state-of-the-art performance on the LaSOT, Ox-UvA, TLP, VOT2018LT and VOT2019LT benchmarks and runs in real-time (3x faster than comparisons)1. 1.

Introduction
Visual object tracking has drawn great attention to large-scale long-term tracking because of its great potential in real-world applications. The main difference between long-*Corresponding author. 1The code will be available at https://github.com/hqucv/ dmtrack
#1
#473 6 2 4 3
#1738 22 24 17 21 4 2 3 1
Visualized illustration of the tracking process of an off-the-shelf MOT
#1
#473
#1738
#1
#473
#1738
Visualized illustration of the tracking process of a detection-based tracker
#1
#473
#1738
Qualitative comparison of our tracker and other long-term trackers
: GT
: GlobalTrack
: LTMU
: JDE
: Ours
Figure 1. Visualization of long-term tracking results on person-5 from LaSOT [8]. “GT” means ground truth. “GlobalTrack [12]” and “LTMU [4]” are two strong long-term trackers. “JDE [34]” is a multi-object tracker. In the ﬁrst line, we show long-term track-ing results from the off-the-shelf MOT model[34]. The object ids are in the upper left corner of the bounding boxes. In the second line, we show top-4 classiﬁcation results from a detection-based tracker[12]. The solid lines show the top-1 predictions.
In the third line, we compare our DMTrack with state-of-the-art compar-ison, and present that distractor awareness is vital to visual object trackers. Better viewed in color with zoom-in. term and short-term trackers is that the former has to deal with the cases in which the target disappears and reappears frequently. Generally, long-term tracking sequences [8, 26, 31] last for hundreds and thousands frames, which usu-1024
ally contain challenges such as appearance change, long-duration disappearance and intra-class distractors. There-fore, long-term trackers should have the abilities of re-detecting objects effectively and distinguish the target from similar distractors (As shown in Figure 1).
Recently, a large number of long-term trackers have been proposed [4, 37, 41, 42]. Luke´ziˇc et al. [20] group long-term trackers into two categorizations: Pseudo long-term tracker (LT0) and re-detecting long-term tracker (LT1). LT0 applies some short-term trackers [6, 45, 43] to the long-term tracking task straightforwardly by simply using the classiﬁ-cation score to distinguish the target from its background.
However, these trackers are prone to drift to distractors due to appearance confusion. LT1 (e.g., SiamDW LT [42],
MBMD [41], SPLT [37], LTMU [4]) uses a re-detection strategy to recover from tracking failure. However, these trackers require a sophisticated design for interaction be-tween local trackers and global detectors. Recently, Huang et al. [12] propose a global instance search (GIS) based tracker using a two-stage detector without motion con-straint. Under the one-shot detection scheme, long-term tracking is simpliﬁed because the switch strategy that used for balancing the local and global modules is no longer needed. However, the heavy computing burdens and un-stable performance caused by global detection make GIS-based methods improper for real-world applications.
To address the above issues, we propose a two-task track-ing framework, which consists of a lightweight detection model and an explicit object association method. For the
ﬁrst task, we reach back to the correlation methods between the template and the search ﬁeld in tracking and unify these methods into a dynamic convolutions (d-convs) generation paradigm [38]. Given powerful dynamic convolutions, we can embed target information into a one-stage anchor-free detection model with multiple kernel designs and integra-tion layers while requiring less computation. For the sec-ond task, we resort to the philosophy of multiple object tracking (MOT). Speciﬁcally, we introduce a novel re-id embedding into the above detection model by jointly learn-ing the two tasks. Beneﬁting from the discriminative re-id features, our tracker achieves favorable performance with a compact association strategy. The two tasks are imple-mented in the MOT framework which reasons distractors explicitly by maintaining all potential similarities tracklets.
Experiments show that our tracker achieves state-of-the-art performance on the ﬁve long-term benchmarks and runs 3x faster than comparisons.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows,
• We propose a two-task long-term tracking framework, which contains a lightweight detector and an explicit object association. By implementing the two tasks in the MOT framework, our tracker obtains a fast infer-ence speed and can distinguish the target from the dis-tractors.
• To build a high-efﬁciency detector, we present a novel dynamic convolutions generation method. To avoiding drifting to distractors, we learn a discriminative re-id embedding to achieve effective tracklet association.
• Our approach achieves state-of-the-art results on ﬁve long-term tracking benchmarks and runs in real-time, which shows that the proposed method can be a more practical baseline for GIS-based trackers. 2.