Abstract
Artistic style transfer is an image editing task that aims at repainting everyday photographs with learned artistic styles. Existing methods learn styles from either a single style example or a collection of artworks. Accordingly, the stylization results are either inferior in visual quality or limited in style controllability. To tackle this problem, we propose a novel Dual Style-Learning Artistic Style Trans-fer (DualAST) framework to learn simultaneously both the holistic artist-style (from a collection of artworks) and the speciﬁc artwork-style (from a single style image): the artist-style sets the tone (i.e., the overall feeling) for the stylized image, while the artwork-style determines the details of the stylized image, such as color and texture. Moreover, we in-* Corresponding author troduce a Style-Control Block (SCB) to adjust the styles of generated images with a set of learnable style-control fac-tors. We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the per-formance of the proposed framework, the results of which conﬁrm the superiority of our method. 1.

Introduction
Artistic style transfer aims to transfer the styles of art-works onto arbitrary photographs to create novel artistic images. The study on this topic has drawn much attention in recent years due to its scientiﬁc and artistic values. To achieve satisfying and convincing stylizations, it is very im-portant to clarify the characteristics of artwork creation.
First, each artist has a speciﬁc painting style, which is distinguishable from others. We can get a good grasp of an 872
artist’s style by studying the collection of his artworks. Intu-itively, the more the number of artworks, the more profound and accurate our understanding of the artist’s style. Second, there exist many variations within one style. For example, although The Starry Night, Sunﬂowers, and Portrait of Dr.
Gachet are all van Gogh’s artworks, they are signiﬁcantly different in terms of color and texture.
To summarize, for the artworks of an artist, from the holistic perspective, they form the unique painting style of the artist; from the individual perspective, they are different from each other, exhibiting remarkable variations. Only if we take these two perspectives into consideration can we synthesize satisfying artistic images in style transfer. Un-fortunately, existing style transfer methods only consider one of the two perspectives, which makes them unable to solve each other’s problem. To be more speciﬁc, on the one hand, some methods [24, 15] only focus on the ﬁrst perspective and learn the holistic artist-style from a col-lection of artworks, neglecting the variations among dif-ferent images. The advantage of [24, 15] is that they can produce striking stylization results with pretty high qual-ity. The defects of them are mainly in two aspects: 1) their stylization results are very limited in style controlla-bility; 2) they can only produce one kind of stylizations, lacking variety. Kotovenko et al. [14] and Svoboda et al.
[27] noticed the variations within one style and alleviated this issue by introducing a ﬁxpoint triplet style loss and a two-stage peer-regularization layer, respectively. However, they still did not achieve satisfying controllable reference-guided stylizations, because they did not enforce an explicit style constraint between the reference (style) image and the stylized image. On the other hand, the other methods
[8, 16, 11, 10, 20, 25, 30] only focus on the second perspec-tive and learn the speciﬁc artwork-style from a single style example. The advantage is that they can produce control-lable stylization results, while the defect is that they are sig-niﬁcantly inferior to [24, 15, 14, 27] in visual quality, since they did not leverage the rich style information reserved in the artwork dataset. As [24] pointed out, it is insufﬁcient to only use a single artwork, because it might not represent the full scope of an artistic style.
Motivated by the observations and analyses above, we propose a novel artistic style transfer framework, termed as DualAST, which learns simultaneously both the holis-tic artist-style (from a collection of artworks) and the spe-ciﬁc artwork-style (from a single style image). Moreover, to better control the style of the generated image, we intro-duce a Style-Control Block (SCB) to our model. Although some existing arbitrary style transfer methods (e.g., AdaIN
[10]) can also be used to perform controllable reference-guided image synthesis by exploring a statistical transfor-mation from reference (style) image onto content image, we argue that it is inﬂexible and suboptimal to employ the manually deﬁned statistics to control the style of the gener-ated image. In comparison, our proposed SCB treats style information as a modulator rather than statistical data, and produces a set of learnable style-control factors to adjust the style of the generated image. In this way, our method is able to produce high-quality and style controllable stylization re-sults with plenty of variations, as shown in Figure 1.
In summary, our main contributions are threefold:
• We propose a novel artistic style transfer framework
DualAST that learns holistic artist-style and speciﬁc artwork-style simultaneously, yielding high-quality and style controllable stylization results with plenty of variations.
• We introduce a Style-Control Block (SCB) to better control the style of the generated image according to the input reference (style) image, resulting in artisti-cally better stylizations.
• We demonstrate the effectiveness and strength of our approach by extensive comparisons with several state-of-the-art style transfer methods. 2.