Abstract
Remote photoplethysmography (rPPG) based physiolog-ical measurement has great application values in health monitoring, emotion analysis, etc. Existing methods mainly focus on how to enhance or extract the very weak blood volume pulse (BVP) signals from face videos, but seldom explicitly model the noises that dominate face video con-tent. Thus, they may suffer from poor generalization abil-ity in unseen scenarios. This paper proposes a novel ad-versarial learning approach for rPPG based physiological measurement by using Dual Generative Adversarial Net-works (Dual-GAN) to model the BVP predictor and noise distribution jointly. The BVP-GAN aims to learn a noise-resistant mapping from input to ground-truth BVP, and the
Noise-GAN aims to learn the noise distribution. The two
GANs can promote each other’s capability, leading to im-proved feature disentanglement between BVP and noises.
Besides, a plug-and-play block named ROI alignment and fusion (ROI-AF) block is proposed to alleviate the inconsis-tencies between different ROIs and exploit informative fea-tures from a wider receptive ﬁeld in terms of ROIs. In com-parison to state-of-the-art methods, our approach achieves better performance in heart rate, heart rate variability, and respiration frequency estimation from face videos. 1.

Introduction
Physiological signals such as heart rate (HR), respira-tion frequency (RF), and heart rate variability (HRV) are important indicators of human health status. Tradition-*Corresponding author. ally, these physiological signals are measured using elec-trocardiography (ECG) and photoplethysmography (PPG); both are skin-contact based approach, which is intrusive and may cause may cause discomfort for human. Recently, no-contact physiological measurement approaches based on re-mote photoplethysmography (rPPG) have attracted increas-ing attention, and most of the approaches use face videos recorded by commodity cameras to perform rPPG based physiological measurement [18, 19, 25]. The principle be-hind rPPG based physiological measurement is that the op-tical absorption by skin changes periodically along with the periodic blood volume change due to heartbeat. Thus, if we can capture the periodic skin color changes, we can obtain the heart rate. However, such skin color changes are very weak and can be easily affected by various noises such as illumination and head movement.
Early approaches for rPPG based physiological measure-ment usually use PCA or ICA to decompose the raw tem-poral signal [1, 20, 28] or perform color space transforma-tions like CHROM [8] and POS [37] to extract the BVP sig-nals. These hand-crafted algorithms usually make certain assumptions about the background noises, e.g., the motion has the same inﬂuence to the intensity variations of differ-ent color channels, based on which the CHROM method can remove the motion inﬂuence by computing the ratio be-tween three channels [8]. However, since the human face is not an ideal Lambertian object, such assumptions do not always hold for every facial region. As a result, while the hand-crafted methods may not require training and have rel-atively good generalization ability, there is still big room to improve the physiological measurement accuracy. In addi-tion, hand-crafted methods may not effectively leverage big training dataset to learn informative features even when a 12404
large dataset is available.
With the great success of deep learning (DL) in vari-ous computer vision tasks [14, 23, 24], DL methods have also been studied for rPPG based physiological measure-ment [25, 27]. Considering the low PSNR of BVP sig-nals in face videos, DL methods usually ﬁrst compute a spatial-temporal map (STMap) [25] or the difference of frames (DOF) [27] before using convolutional neural net-works (CNNs) to learn informative features for physiologi-cal signals. However, most DL methods only focus on how to extract BVP signals from videos but ignore the modeling of background noises that dominate the video’s content.
Some studies demonstrated that using synthetic physio-logical signals with artiﬁcial noises can beneﬁt the training of DL-based physiological measurement methods [21, 27].
However, these synthetic noises are generally compiled by mixing Gaussian noise with trigonometric functions (e.g., sine or cosine) or step pulses. Apparently, such a syn-thetic physiological signal generation approach is not able to replicate the real noise distribution in practical scenar-ios. As a result, their effectiveness for improving the model robustness is also limited.
To address these issues, we propose a novel adversarial learning approach for robust rPPG based remote physiolog-ical measurement by using dual generative adversarial net-works (Dual-GAN) to simultaneously model the BVP pre-dictor and noise distribution. As illustrated in Fig. 1, we
ﬁrst compute the spatial-temporal map (STMap) from the input video to obtain a preliminary representation of the
BVP signal. Then, we use one GAN model to learn the mapping from STMap to BVP, in which the generator (a.k.a.
BVP estimator) aims to generate a BVP signal as similar as the ground-truth BVP, while the discriminator aims to distinguish between the generated BVP from the ground-truth BVP. The other GAN is used to model the noise dis-tribution w.r.t. the BVP, in which the generator (including a noise-free and a noise STMap generator) aims to gener-ate a synthetic STMap as similar as the STMap computed from video, while the discriminator (shared) aims to distin-guish between the synthetic STMap and the real STMap.
The Dual-GAN can enhance the capability of each other.
The former improves the noise distribution learning ability of the latter, and the latter, like online data augmentation, can in turn improve the robustness of the former BVP pre-dictor against unseen noises.
In addition, existing methods [25] treat the temporal sig-nals of different ROIs (individual rows of STMap) indis-criminately during convolution; however face is not an ideal
Lambertian object, the temporal signals of different ROIs should have different BVP and noise distributions. There-fore, we also propose a plug-and-play module named ROI alignment and fusion (ROI-AF) block, which can perform
ROI-wise convolution to handle such noise distribution in-consistency of individual ROIs, and by fusing BVP features from a wider receptive ﬁeld.
The contributions of this work are as follows: 1) We propose a novel Dual-GAN architecture for rPPG based physiological measurement, which can not only model BVP predictor but also explicitly model noise dis-tribution via adversarial learning, and thus can obtain more robustness BVP representation against unseen noises. 2) We propose a plug-and-play ROI-AF block, which can be used after conventional convolution layers to address noise and BVP distribution inconsistency among different
ROIs. 3) The proposed approach outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in HR, HRV and RF estimation under both intra-dataset and cross-dataset testings, showing its robust-ness again complicated scenarios. 2.