Abstract
Multi-Camera Multiple Object Tracking (MC-MOT) is a signiﬁcant computer vision problem due to its emerging applicability in several real-world applications. Despite a large number of existing works, solving the data association problem in any MC-MOT pipeline is arguably one of the most challenging tasks. Developing a robust MC-MOT sys-tem, however, is still highly challenging due to many practi-cal issues such as inconsistent lighting conditions, varying object movement patterns, or the trajectory occlusions of the objects between the cameras. To address these prob-lems, this work, therefore, proposes a new Dynamic Graph
Model with Link Prediction (DyGLIP) approach 1 to solve the data association task. Compared to existing methods, our new model offers several advantages, including bet-ter feature representations and the ability to recover from lost tracks during camera transitions. Moreover, our model works gracefully regardless of the overlapping ratios be-tween the cameras. Experimental results show that we out-perform existing MC-MOT algorithms by a large margin on several practical datasets. Notably, our model works favor-ably on online settings but can be extended to an incremen-tal approach for large-scale datasets. 1.

Introduction
Multi-Camera Multiple Object Tracking (MC-MOT) plays an essential role in computer vision due to its potential in many real-world applications such as self-driving cars, crowd behavior analysis, anomaly detection, etc. Although recent Multi-Camera Multiple Object Tracking (MC-MOT) 1Visit https://github.com/uark-cviu/DyGLIP for the im-plementation of DyGLIP.
Figure 1. Top: Pedestrians in the MCT dataset [9], Bottom: Cars in the CityFlow dataset [37]. methods have achieved promising results in several large-scale datasets, there are still many challenges that need to be addressed. Among them, data association, a crucial step in determining the performance of an MC-MOT pipeline, has attracted a considerable amount of attention lately. While 13784
the association itself is challenging in single-camera MOT applications, this task becomes even more difﬁcult in MC-MOT settings due to possibly inconsistent lightning condi-tions or occlusion patterns between the cameras. For exam-ple, feature vectors, given by an off-the-shelf object detec-tor and Re-Identiﬁcation (Re-ID) models, associated with a particular object during its transition from an indoor to an outdoor environment can be totally different as shown in Fig. 1. This breaks the connection between the trajec-tory representation of an object and its previous feature vec-tors, leading to wrong identity (ID) assignments. Failures in data association at a particular frame will potentially lead to long-term detrimental effects for an online tracking sys-tem. In practice, many circumstances that are much more complex than simply generate more new IDs which could signiﬁcantly deteriorate the tracking accuracy. Therefore, improving data association plays a crucial role in determin-ing the performance of an MC-MOT algorithm.
To tackle the problem of data association mentioned above, our work introduces a totally new perspective to tackle the association task in MC-MOT. Most previous works rely on feature vectors obtained from an underlying object detector and use them to solve the assignment prob-lem, e.g., using nearest neighbors [33], clustering [29, 50] or solving an instance of non-negative matrix factorization
[16]. Instead, we propose to consider the problem of data association as a link prediction on a graph, where the graph vertices are associated with the tracks. To construct our pre-dictor, we introduce a new dynamic graph formulation that can take into account the temporal information of an ob-ject over a period of time and its relation to other objects.
As shown in the experiments in Section 4.3, this dynamic graph formulation allows leveraging the feature represen-tations and moving patterns of each object to improve ID assignment, leading to better performance compared to the state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods.
Contributions The main contributions of our work can be summarized as follows. Firstly, a new MC-MOT frame-work is presented using the link prediction in conjunction with a dynamic graph formulation. We demonstrate that this new model signiﬁcantly improves the association task in numerous MC-MOT datasets by a large margin. To the best of our knowledge, it is the ﬁrst time link prediction and dynamic graph are used together in MC-MOT. Secondly, the proposed dynamic graph will be incorporated with the attention mechanism, allowing dynamically accumulating temporal and spatial information to result in a new graph embedding yielding highly accurate link prediction results. 2.