Abstract
Deep learning methods have been widely applied to au-tomatic facial action unit (AU) intensity estimation and achieved the state-of-the-art performance. These methods, however, are mostly appearance-based and fail to exploit the underlying structural information among AUs. In this paper, we propose a novel dynamic probabilistic graph con-volution (DPG) model to simultaneously exploit AU appear-ances, AU dynamics, and their semantic structural depen-dencies for AU intensity estimation. Firstly, we propose to use Bayesian Network to capture the inherent dependencies among AUs. Secondly, we introduce probabilistic graph convolution that allows to perform graph convolution on the distribution of Bayesian Network structure to extract
AU structural features. Finally, we introduce a dynamic deep model based on LSTM to simultaneously combine AU appearance features, AU dynamic features, and AU struc-tural features for AU intensity estimation. In experiments, our method achieves comparable and even better perfor-mance with the state-of-the-art methods on two benchmark facial AU intensity estimation databases, i.e., FERA 2015 and DISFA. 1.

Introduction
Facial muscle movements contain rich information re-lated to human emotions, which are signiﬁcant for human communication. Ekman and Friesen proposed a Facial Ac-tion Coding System (FACS) [8] to depict the movement of these facial muscles. FACS deﬁnes rules to annotate the intensities of different action units (AUs) and the AU inten-sities are quantiﬁed into 6 discrete levels.
With the availability of high performance computing and
∗Corresponding author
Figure 1. The illustration of combining the dynamic and struc-tural dependencies with semantic knowledge for AU intensity es-timation. the large scale datasets, deep neural network has been a dominant method in many computer vision tasks [35, 13].
The most commonly used deep neural networks, i.e., Con-volutional Neural Network (CNN) [19] and Long Short-Term Memory Network (LSTM) [15], show excellent per-formance in extracting discriminative local features and capturing the temporal dependencies, respectively. Their applications in the ﬁeld of human behavior analysis also achieve much improvement, including human action recog-nition [26], expression recognition [41] and facial AU recognition [24, 36, 6, 21, 30]. However, their success highly rely on the large amount of training data, which is difﬁcult to obtain for facial AU intensity estimation. The reason is that the process of facial AU intensity annotation is time-consuming and requires strong domain expertise.
Moreover, the data distribution of AU intensity is generally imbalanced. Therefore, the performance of deep method on
AU intensity estimation is limited under insufﬁcient data.
Rather than increasing training data for AU intensity esti-mation, the prior knowledge provides more generic infor-mation that is helpful to improve the performance of deep model. Because of the underlying facial anatomy and the need to form a coherent facial expression, a certain group of AUs may be activated under a speciﬁc expression and, at the same time, they may suppress the activity of other AUs
[45]. For instance, cheek raiser and lip corner puller occur simultaneously for smile. Besides, the changes of AU over a short temporal period are usually observed as continuous 4845
and smooth. Therefore, not only the AUs spatial depen-dencies, but also their temporal consistency, i.e., dynamics, should be leveraged in estimating AU intensity.
Considering the aforementioned properties, we propose a novel dynamic probabilistic graph convolution (DPG) model that leverages semantic dependencies among AUs and integrates these semantic probabilistic information into a dynamic deep model for AU intensity estimation. As shown in Figure 1, semantic AU knowledge and structural dependency are combined within a uniﬁed probabilistic and dynamic frame. Firstly, we capture AU semantic depen-dencies with a Bayesian Network, which is advantageous in capturing the causal relationships and provides interpretable
AU dependencies. Instead of using a deterministic graph, a sampling method is employed to estimate the posterior dis-tribution of graph structure given the AU intensity estima-tion. We then introduce the proposed probabilistic graph convolution by incorporating all possible semantic struc-tures with their probabilities into the conventional graph convolution. Finally, the probabilistic graph convolution model is embedded in a dynamic deep model, which simul-taneously captures AU appearance, semantic structural and dynamic features for AU intensity estimation.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose a dynamic probabilistic deep framework to simultaneously integrate the AU appearance informa-tion, their dynamics and their structural dependencies for AU intensity estimation.
• We introduce a probabilistic graph convolution that allows learning structural features over probabilistic graphs.
• Our method achieves comparable and even better per-formance than the state-of-the-art methods on two benchmark AU intensity estimation datasets. 2.