Abstract
Snapshot compressive imaging (SCI) is a new type of compressive imaging system that compresses multiple frames of images into a single snapshot measurement, which enjoys low cost, low bandwidth, and high-speed sens-ing rate. By applying the existing SCI methods to deal with hyperspectral images, however, could not fully exploit the underlying structures, and thereby demonstrate unsatisfac-tory reconstruction performance. To remedy such issue, this paper aims to propose a new effective method by taking ad-vantage of two intrinsic priors of the hyperspectral images, namely deep image denoising and total variation (TV) pri-ors. Speciﬁcally, we propose an optimization objective to utilize these two priors. By solving this optimization ob-jective, our method is equivalent to incorporate a weighted
FFDNet and a 2DTV or 3DTV denoiser into the plug-and-play framework. Extensive numerical experiments demon-strate the outperformance of the proposed method over sev-eral state-of-the-art alternatives. Additionally, we provide a detailed convergence analysis of the resulting plug-and-play algorithm under relatively weak conditions such as without using diminishing step sizes. The code is avail-able at https://github.com/ucker/SCI- TV-FFDNet. 1.

Introduction
Compressive sensing [5, 1] is a popular imaging technol-ogy that can be employed to capture video [8, 19, 15, 32, 22, 23] and hyperspectral images [6, 24, 25, 30, 2]. One of the most important compressive sensing systems is the so-called snapshot compressive imaging (SCI) [15, 24]. Pre-cisely, SCI uses 2D sensors to obtain higher dimensional image data and exploit corresponding algorithms to recon-struct the desired data. As compared with traditional com-*Corresponding author. pressive sensing technology, SCI possesses of low memory, low power consumption, low bandwidth and low cost, and as such, can be used to efﬁcient capture the hyperspectral images. Among the existing SCI systems, coded aperture snapshot spectral imaging (CASSI) [25] is a representative hyperspectral SCI system, which combines hyperspectral images of different wavelengths into a single 2D one.
Along with the development of hardware, various re-construction algorithms have been proposed for SCI. GAP-TV [28] applied total variation minimization under the gen-eralized alternating projection (GAP) [13] framework. Re-cently, DeSCI [14] demonstrates the-state-of-art results in reconstructing both video and hyperspectral image data. As further shown in [31], DeSCI can be regarded as a plug-and-play (PnP) algorithm that employs rank minimization as an intermediate step during reconstruction. However, the low computational speed of DeSCI precludes its applications.
For example, DeSCI costs more than six hours to recon-struct a hyperspectral image of size 1021 × 703 × 24 from its snapshot measurement. While GAP-TV is a faster algo-rithm, it cannot reconstruct high-quality images that can be
ﬁtted for real applications. Therefore, [31] incorporated a deep denoiser network such as FFDNet [34] into PnP algo-rithm [3]. Because FFDNet can be performed on GPU, it runs very fast compared with DeSCI. However, [31] mainly focused on video SCI reconstruction, and as we shall show later, its reconstruction performance on hyperspectral im-ages are not satisfactory.
Basically, applying DeSCI for hyperspectral image re-construction requires to perform GAP-TV to get its initial value. Numerical experiments revealed that this initial value is crucial for the performance of DeSCI. If the initializa-tion is slightly worse, the performance of DeSCI could be largely poor. As such, it is highly demanding to develop newly effective method to address the aforementioned is-sues.
DeSCI which uses GAP-TV reconstruction results as its 9127
Figure 1. Sensing process of CASSI. initialization can be regarded as a primitive way of com-bining different priors. Considering that different intrinsic priors could promote each other, we propose a new method by combining the deep image denoising and TV priors to enhance hyperspectral image reconstruction. Although us-ing a denoising network such as FFDNet or TV regular-ization alone can not obtain satisfactory results, the priors combined by our method can take advantage of denoising network and TV at the same time and make the two priors promote each other, and thereby obtain more much better reconstruction results.
Our paper makes the following contributions: 1. We propose a general framework that can combine deep denoising and total variation priors for SCI re-construction of hyperspectral images.
In the recon-struction process, these two priors can promote each other to boost the quality of reconstructed images. 2. We conduct extensive experiments on both simulated and real datasets. The numerical results have veriﬁed the efﬁciency and effectiveness of our algorithm. 3. We prove the convergence of our algorithm for SCI reconstruction without using diminishing step sizes.
What’s more, we are the ﬁrst ones that prove the con-vergence of accelerated PnP-GAP for SCI, which is used in our simulated experiments.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We intro-duce the SCI model and the corresponding reconstruction algorithms in Section 2. Our proposed method and the con-vergence analysis of the resulting algorithm are developed in Section 3. Extensive experiments are presented in Sec-tion 4.