Abstract 1.

Introduction
In recent years, denoising methods based on deep learn-ing have achieved unparalleled performance at the cost of large computational complexity. In this work, we propose an Efﬁcient Multi-stage Video Denoising algorithm, called
EMVD, to drastically reduce the complexity while maintain-ing or even improving the performance. First, a fusion stage reduces the noise through a recursive combination of all past frames in the video. Then, a denoising stage removes the noise in the fused frame. Finally, a reﬁnement stage re-stores the missing high frequency in the denoised frame. All stages operate on a transform-domain representation ob-tained by learnable and invertible linear operators which simultaneously increase accuracy and decrease complexity of the model. A single loss on the ﬁnal output is sufﬁcient for successful convergence, hence making EMVD easy to train.
Experiments on real raw data demonstrate that EMVD out-performs the state of the art when complexity is constrained, and even remains competitive against methods whose com-plexities are several orders of magnitude higher. Further, the low complexity and memory requirements of EMVD en-able real-time video denoising on commercial SoC in mo-bile devices.
*Authors contributed equally.
Even with the advance of technology, digital images are invariably affected by several inherent or external disturb-ing factors due to the stochastic nature of the image for-mation processes (e.g., photon counting) [16], use of com-pact camera hardware (e.g., mobile sensors or lenses) [42], and/or challenging acquisition settings (e.g., low light). Be-cause of this, a number of methods (i.e., an image process-ing pipeline) must be applied to the low-quality observed data to generate a ﬁnal high-quality output image. Denois-ing is particularly important because it is typically at the beginning of the pipeline, and thus its output has a direct effect on all other operations [39].
In the past decades, a plethora of image denoising algo-rithms have been proposed in the literature [5, 12], but the current state of the art is dominated by deep learning meth-ods based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [43, 25, 27]. Video denoising models exploits the temporal correlation inherently present in natural videos and thus achieve better performance than single-frame methods [28, 1, 30, 36, 42], however their computational requirements make real-time processing unattainable on most hardware unless some compromise in image quality is made [15].
In this work we propose EMVD, an Efﬁcient Multi-stage
Video Denoising method to drastically reduce the complex-13466
ity required to achieve high-quality results. Firstly, noise in the input frame is reduced by recursively fusing all past frames in the video. Then, a denoising stage removes any remaining noise in the fused image. Finally, a reﬁnement stage is applied to the denoised image to further improve its quality by adaptively restoring the high-frequency de-tails. All stages are performed within a domain generated by learnable and invertible linear transform operators that jointly decorrelate color and frequency information. As can be seen in Fig. 1, the proposed EMVD is able to outperform more complex state-of-the-art methods [42] at a fraction of the computational cost. In summary, the main contributions of this work are
• High-Quality Efﬁcient Denoising. The proposed
EMVD leverages spatio-temporal correlation of nat-ural videos through specialized processing stages, namely temporal fusion, spatial denoising, and spatio-temporal reﬁnement. This design allows to signiﬁ-cantly reduce the model complexity without compro-mising its denoising capabilities.
• Interpretable Design. All stages in the proposed
EMVD have a clear objective and will naturally con-verge to the desired behavior without any explicit su-pervision. As a result, the inner workings of the pro-posed EMVD can be easily inspected and controlled at both inference and training time.
• Learnable and Invertible Transforms. Linear trans-implemented as learnable convolu-form operators, tional layers, are used to optimally decorrelate color and frequency information. The learnable parameters are regularized in the loss to ensure transform invert-ibility. This simultaneously allows to reduce complex-ity and increase accuracy of the model. 2.