Abstract
The functional map framework has proven to be ex-tremely effective for representing dense correspondences between deformable shapes. A key step in this framework is to formulate suitable preservation constraints to encode the geometric information that must be preserved by the un-known map. For this issue, we construct novel and power-ful constraints to determine the functional map, where mul-tiscale spectral manifold wavelets are required to be pre-served at each scale correspondingly. Such constraints al-low us to extract signiﬁcantly more information than previ-ous methods, especially those based on descriptor preser-vation constraints, and strongly ensure the isometric prop-erty of the map. In addition, we also propose a remarkable efﬁcient iterative method to alternatively update the func-tional maps and pointwise maps. Moreover, when we use the tight wavelet frames in iterations, the computation of the functional maps boils down to a simple ﬁltering procedure with low-pass and various band-pass ﬁlters, which avoids time-consuming solving large systems of linear equations commonly presented in functional maps. We demonstrate on a wide variety of experiments with different datasets that our approach achieves signiﬁcant improvements both in the shape correspondence quality and the computing efﬁciency. 1.

Introduction
Finding correspondences between non-rigid shapes is a fundamental problem in computer graphics, vision and pattern recognition, with countless applications including shape comparison, texture transfer and shape interpolation, just to name a few [37].
Since many real-world deformations are approximately isometric, ﬁnding near isometric maps possesses practical
*Joint ﬁrst author.
†Corresponding author: shjliu.cg@csu.edu.cn (S.Liu).
Figure 1. Demonstration of our efﬁcient shape correspondence it-erative updating. Starting with a noisy functional map between two isometric deformation shapes, we alternately optimize the functional maps and the pointwise maps. The pointwise maps are visualized by color transfer. Note that iterating twice can reach signiﬁcant improvements even with a quite noisy initialization and costs 0.54 seconds for triangle meshes with 16K vertices. signiﬁcance in non-rigid shape analysis and it has been well studied in the last decades. Among extensive strategies for this task, one of the most inﬂuential techniques in re-cent years is the functional map framework, originally pro-vided by [24] and extended by plenty of fellow-up works
[29, 31, 28, 30]. This framework proposed to determine a functional map operator, that maps between the spaces of square-integrable functions on the respective shapes, then a high-quality pointwise correspondence can be recovered from the correspondence of special functions. The most at-tractive property of functional maps is ﬁnding correspon-dence boils down to a quite simple and efﬁcient algebraic problem.
A key step in the functional map framework is to for-mulate function preservation constraints to a linear system of equations. These function preservation constraints typ-ically encode the information (e.g., geometric or appear-ance) that must be globally preserved by the unknown map.
In isometric shape correspondence, the commonly used constraints include those aiming at approximately align-ing the given descriptor functions and commuting with the
Laplace-Beltrami operators as well [24, 27, 8], or more 14536
powerful descriptor preservation constraints via commuta-tivity [23] and manifold optimization [14]. However, the above descriptor based constraints still suffer severe disad-vantages in correspondence quality or computing efﬁciency, due to the difﬁculties of obtaining a large set of informa-tive and linearly independent descriptor functions and the insufﬁcient encoding for isometric properties of deformed shapes.
Contributions. To address the above-mentioned chal-lenges in the recent functional maps, in this paper, we con-centrate on exploiting novel constraints and efﬁcient com-putation ways into the pipeline of the functional maps. Our inspirations come from the powerful spectral manifold (or graph) wavelets (SMWs) [11, 15], which are constructed with a similar manner to the classical wavelets, still via sig-nal ﬁltering in the frequency spaces of manifolds with a set of suitable ﬁlters (functions). SMWs inherit most of the powerful properties of the classical wavelets, such as space-frequency locality, multiscale characteristics, etc, and can be computed efﬁciently.
The core idea of our work is that we impose SMWs preservation constraints on the functional maps, where the multiscale SMWs are required to be preserved at each scale correspondingly. This strategy resorts to the attractive prop-erties of SMWs in non-rigid shape analysis tasks, mainly including (1) SMWs still hold the intrinsic invariance un-der shape isometric deformations. (2) They can efﬁciently and ﬂexibly encode shape features of different frequency bands, ranging from the geometric features of the immedi-ate neighborhoods around each point to the neighborhood with greater diffusion radii. Therefore, via a few scales of intrinsic SMWs located at each point on the shapes preserved during the mapping, the isometric properties of the maps can be sufﬁciently extracted and strongly en-sured, while maintaining the overall linear system nature of the functional map framework. As opposed to the high-dimensional descriptors or additional regularizers in the previous works, our constraints are much simpler, more compact and efﬁcient.
In addition, we also propose a remarkable efﬁcient itera-tion way to alternatively update the computation of the func-tional maps and pointwise maps, where high-quality corre-spondences generally can be reached with only two or three iterations, as shown in Figure 1. More speciﬁcally, we show that if using suitable SMWs, more exactly, tight wavelet frames, the computation of the functional mapping matrices boils down to a simple iterative ﬁltering procedure by vari-ous band-pass ﬁlters. This way eventually avoids the time-consuming solution of a large system of linear equations commonly presented in previous works and leads the ma-trices closer to the structures of isometric pointwise maps.
We demonstrate on a wide range of experiments that our method helps to obtain better correspondences, especially with signiﬁcantly higher computation efﬁciency. 2.