Abstract
Temporal grounding aims to localize temporal bound-aries within untrimmed videos by language queries, but it faces the challenge of two types of inevitable human un-certainties: query uncertainty and label uncertainty. The two uncertainties stem from human subjectivity, leading to limited generalization ability of temporal grounding.
In this work, we propose a novel DeNet (Decoupling and De-bias) to embrace human uncertainty: Decoupling — We ex-plicitly disentangle each query into a relation feature and a modiﬁed feature. The relation feature, which is mainly based on skeleton-like words (including nouns and verbs), aims to extract basic and consistent information in the pres-ence of query uncertainty. Meanwhile, modiﬁed feature as-signed with style-like words (including adjectives, adverbs, etc) represents the subjective information, and thus brings personalized predictions; De-bias — We propose a de-bias mechanism to generate diverse predictions, aim to allevi-ate the bias caused by single-style annotations in the pres-ence of label uncertainty. Moreover, we put forward new multi-label metrics to diversify the performance evaluation.
Extensive experiments show that our approach is more ef-fective and robust than state-of-the-arts on Charades-STA and ActivityNet Captions datasets. 1.

Introduction
As the increasing demand for video understanding, many related works have drawn increasing attention, e.g. ac-tion recognition [31, 37, 23] and temporal action detec-tion [50, 20]. These tasks rely on trimmed videos or pre-deﬁned action categories, yet most videos are untrimmed and associated with open-world language descriptions in real scenarios. Temporal grounding task aims to localize corresponding temporal boundaries in an untrimmed video
*This is the corresponding author.
Figure 1. Example of temporal grounding task with two types of uncertainties. Query uncertainty: For one same event, there are different language expressions. Label uncertainty: Given one same query and video, different annotators may provide a variety of temporal boundaries. by a language query. Thus, models need to understand both
ﬁne-grained video content and complex language queries.
Recently, this task has also shown its potential in a wide range of applications, e.g. video captioning [26, 41, 5], video object segmentation [7, 13] and video question an-swering [19, 14, 35].
We observe there lies inherent uncertainty in temporal grounding task and classify it into two types: 1) One is query uncertainty stemming from different expressions for one same event. As shown in Figure 1, three queries are attached to the same moment. Previous approaches usually leverage LSTM-based [45, 47] networks to encode entire language as a deterministic vector. However, the variety of expressions makes it challenging to extract discriminative semantic features, sometimes leading to quite different pre-dictions for the same event. 2) The other is label uncertainty representing subjective boundaries for one same event. As shown in Figure 1, for the same query A and video, tempo-ral boundaries annotated by different people exist disagree-8445
ment. Due to the expensive cost of multiple-labeling, most of previous models [24, 28] are optimized using single-style annotations (which means each sample is labeled by one an-notator), whereas the inherent uncertainty of event localiza-tion [29] is ignored. As a result, models may learn single-style prediction bias from training datasets, leading to lim-ited generalization performances.
Considering the fact that uncertainty can cover a broad range of human perspectives, it should be embraced to pro-mote robust temporal grounding. Furthermore, we argue single-annotation, single prediction is not reasonable in the presence of uncertainty, and diversity of predictions is an effective way to alleviate the bias caused by single-style an-notations. Therefore, the key challenge is how to obtain di-verse predictions. Inspired by linguistic knowledge, we ﬁnd consistent discriminative information lies in a skeleton-like relation phrase (including nouns and verbs), and query un-certainty mainly exists in a style-like modiﬁed phrase (in-cluding adjectives, adverbs, etc). On one hand, the rela-tion phrase is beneﬁcial to robust temporal grounding. On the other hand, the modiﬁed phrase may be largely associ-ated with human preferences and brings personalized dif-ferences. Based on this intuition, our main idea is to lever-age various expressions stemming from query uncertainty to obtain a diverse yet plausible prediction set that ﬁts label uncertainty.
In this paper, we propose one novel DeNet (Decoupling and De-bias) to embrace the two types of uncertainties in the temporal grounding task. First of all, a decoupling method is introduced to disentangle each query into a re-lation feature and a modiﬁed feature using Parts-of-Speech (PoS). While discriminative and consistent information is obtained from the relation feature, personalized informa-tion can be also reserved in the modiﬁed feature. Then, a de-bias mechanism is proposed to generate diverse predic-tions, which includes sampling operation, multiple choice learning (MCL) [10], clustering, etc. Speciﬁcally, we en-code the modiﬁed feature as a Gaussian distribution and adopt a sampling operation in the latent space to obtain mul-tiple query representations. To tackle the dilemma between multiple predictions and single-style annotations, we intro-duce a min-loss from MCL to optimize DeNet to generate diverse predictions. In the inference stage, multiple predic-tions are clustered into one diverse yet plausible prediction set. Moreover, we devise multi-label metrics to meet for multiple testing annotations situations. Finally, DeNet is evaluated on two popular datasets Charades-STA [6] and
ActivityNet Captions [2, 16] in terms of standard metrics and new multi-label metrics. To sum up, the main contribu-tions of our work are as follows: (1) We ﬁrst attempt to embrace two types of human un-certainties: query uncertainty and label uncertainty, in one uniﬁed network DeNet to model robust temporal grounding. (2) We develop a decoupling module in the language en-coding, and one de-bias mechanism in the temporal regres-sion. With the two designs, diverse yet plausible predictions can be obtained to ﬁt human diversity in real scenarios. (3) We devise new multi-label metrics to meet multiple annotations and verify the effectiveness and robustness of
DeNet on both Charades-STA and ActivityNet Captions. 2.