Abstract
Accurate prediction of pedestrian and bicyclist paths is integral to the development of reliable autonomous vehicles in dense urban environments. The interactions between ve-hicle and pedestrian or bicyclist have a signiﬁcant impact on the trajectories of trafﬁc participants e.g. stopping or turning to avoid collisions. Although recent datasets and tra-jectory prediction approaches have fostered the development of autonomous vehicles yet the amount of vehicle-pedestrian (bicyclist) interactions modeled are sparse. In this work, we propose Euro-PVI, a dataset of pedestrian and bicyclist tra-jectories. In particular, our dataset caters more diverse and complex interactions in dense urban scenarios compared to the existing datasets. To address the challenges in predict-ing future trajectories with dense interactions, we develop a joint inference model that learns an expressive multi-modal shared latent space across agents in the urban scene. This enables our Joint-β-cVAE approach to better model the dis-tribution of future trajectories. We achieve state of the art results on the nuScenes and Euro-PVI datasets demonstrat-ing the importance of capturing interactions between ego-vehicle and pedestrians (bicyclists) for accurate predictions. 1.

Introduction
Notwithstanding recent progress in the development of reliable self-driving vehicles, dense inner city environments remain challenging. One of the key components for the success of self-driving vehicles in dense urban environments is anticipation [4, 22]. Anticipating the motion of trafﬁc participants in dense urban environments is made especially challenging due to the effect of interactions between different agents. For example, a pedestrian might turn onto the road to avoid an obstacle on the sidewalk which requires the vehicle to stop (Fig. 1c). Alternately, a pedestrian attempting to cross the road ahead of the ego-vehicle might continue or stop depending upon the distance and velocity of the vehicle (a) Pedestrian speeds to avoid vehicle. (b) Pedestrians yield to the vehicle. (c) Vehicle slows to avoid pedestrian. (d) Vehicle yields to the bicyclists.
Figure 1. Examples of interactions between the ego-vehicle and pedestrians (bicyclists) in Euro-PVI. (c.f . Fig. 2). Thus, interactions add signiﬁcant complexity to the distribution of the likely future trajectories which is highly multi-modal.
Recently, datasets like nuScenes [6], Argoverse [8], or
Lyft L5 [18] have greatly aided the development of trajectory prediction methods. However, these datasets are primarily focused on trajectories of vehicles and vehicle-vehicle in-teractions – collected to a large extent on multi-lane roads in North America or Asia, with sparse interactions between the ego-vehicle and pedestrians or bicyclists (e.g. Figure 4 in [18]). Therefore, they do not represent trajectories in dense urban environments well where interactions between the trajectories of agents are prominent. Such scenarios are particularly common in inner-city environments in Europe.
In this work, we propose the new European Pedestrian
Vehicle Interaction (Euro-PVI) dataset 1 which is collected in a dense urban environment in Brussels and Leuven, Bel-gium. The Euro-PVI dataset contains a rich and diverse set of interactions between the ego-vehicle and pedestrians (bicyclists). Sequences are recorded near busy urban land-marks e.g. railway stations, narrow lanes or intersections (c.f . Figs. 1 to 3) where interactions are frequent and it is 1The dataset is available at www.europvi.mpi-inf.mpg.de 6408
therefore challenging to predict pedestrian (bicyclist) paths.
Further, in spite of the recent progress in trajectory pre-diction methods, accurately capturing the multi-modal distri-bution of future trajectories e.g. in dense urban environments remains challenging. Current state of the art [3, 28, 37] gen-erative models for trajectory prediction encode interactions directly in the posterior. Thus, the latent space does not express interaction information from the input distribution which limits the accuracy of the generated future trajectories.
To address this limitation, we develop a latent variable deep generative model which jointly models the distribution of future trajectories of the agents in the scene. Our Joint-β-Conditional Variational Autoencoder (Joint-β-cVAE) models a “shared” latent space between agents, to better capture the effect of interactions in the latent space and accurately repre-sent the multi-modal distribution of trajectories.
Our contributions are, 1. We propose Euro-PVI, a novel dataset of pedestrian and bicyclist trajectories recorded in
Europe with dense interactions with the ego-vehicle. 2. Our dataset facilitates research on dense interactions as we show that – in contrast to prior datasets – there is a pronounced performance gap between methods that model vehicle-pedes-trian-interaction vs not. 3. To this end, we develop a latent generative model – Joint-β-cVAE – that models a shared latent space to better capture the effect of interactions on the multi-modal distribution of future trajectories. 4. Finally, we demonstrate state of the art performance on pedestrian (bicyclist) trajectory prediction on nuScenes and Euro-PVI. 2.