Abstract
Analysis of bispectral difference plays a critical role in various applications that involve rays propagating in a light absorbing medium.
In general, the bispectral difference is obtained by subtracting signals at two individual wave-lengths captured by ordinary digital cameras, which tends to inherit the drawbacks of conventional cameras in dy-namic range, response speed and quantization precision. In this paper, we propose a novel method to obtain a bispec-tral difference image using an event camera with temporally modulated illumination. Our method is rooted in a key ob-servation on the analogy between the bispectral photometry principle of the participating medium and the event gener-ating mechanism in an event camera. By carefully modulat-ing the bispectral illumination, our method allows to read out the bispectral difference directly from triggered events.
Experiments using a prototype imaging system have veriﬁed the feasibility of this novel usage of event cameras in pho-tometry based vision tasks, such as 3D shape reconstruction in water. 1.

Introduction
Analysis of bispectral difference, i.e. difference of the absorbance between two individual wavelengths, plays a critical role in various applications that involve rays propa-gating in a light absorbing medium, such as water. Since the absorbance of a medium depends on the wavelength of light and the medium itself, bispectral analysis of the absorbance allows to determine some quantities that might serve vari-ous purposes. For example, in analytical chemistry, a rela-tive concentration of matter in a mixture is determined from the bispectral difference [41], and in atmospheric science,
*This work was partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Num-bers JP20H04215, JP20H05951 and JP17H04686. It has been conducted when T. Takatani and Y. Zheng were afﬁliated with National Institute of
Informatics, Japan. The corresponding author is Y. Zheng (yqzheng@ai.u-tokyo.ac.jp).
Data acquisition
Computation
Constant illumination
Target medium
Conventional camera
Logarithmic transformation
Subtraction log log
-Modulated illumination
Target medium
Event camera
Accumulation
Σ e c n e r e f f i d l a r t c e p s i
B m e t s y s l a c i p y
T m e t s y s r u
O
Emitted light
Transmitted light Triggered events Accumulated events
Figure 1: Abstract of our method. Our system allows to read out the bispectral difference directly as the number of events triggered by the temporally modulated illumination, in which the operations required in the typical system are conducted by the event camera. analysis of the bispectral difference is employed to trace and classify gasses and particles [23].
In general, the bispectral difference is obtained by sub-tracting signals at the two wavelengths captured by ordinary digital cameras. A typical system of bispectral photometry uses a conventional camera, as shown in Fig. 1 (top). Light at the two wavelengths illuminates a target medium and then the camera captures transmitted light at each of the wave-lengths. The logarithms of the captured signals and the sub-traction of them result in the bispectral difference. Although the operations in themselves are not complicated, the per-formance of obtaining the bispectral difference is affected by the well-known drawbacks of conventional cameras in dynamic range and quantization precision essentially. Thus, a speciﬁc system is required to resolve these problems.
Recently, event cameras have emerged in robotics and computer vision. Event cameras do not capture brightness images at a ﬁxed rate. Instead, each pixel inside an event camera independently and asynchronously records a tem-15638      
poral change in brightness as an event. Compared to con-ventional cameras, event cameras have superior features of high dynamic range (HDR), high temporal resolution, and low power consumption. Furthermore, event cameras have remarkable features inside their electronic circuit, which have not been deeply delved. In event cameras, ﬁrst, a light signal is logarithmically ampliﬁed [22, 35]. And then the signal is temporally differentiated. Finally, an event is trig-gered when the difference reaches a threshold (Fig. 2). This mechanism is analogous to the operations in the typical sys-tem.
In this paper, we propose a novel method to obtain a bis-pectral difference image using an event camera with tempo-rally modulated illumination, as shown in Fig. 1 (bottom).
Temporally modulated light at two individual wavelengths illuminates a target medium. The event camera records a temporal series of events triggered by the modulated bis-pectral illumination. The bispectral difference is read out directly as the number of the events because the operations required in the typical system are conducted by the event camera. We develop a prototype imaging system and val-idate our method in real experiments on depth recovery in water and turbid medium concentration estimation.
This paper has three major contributions. First, we dis-cover an interesting analogy between the bispectral pho-tometry principle of the participating medium and the event generating mechanism in an event camera. Second, by care-fully modulating the bispectral illumination, our method al-lows to read out the bispectral difference directly as the number of events. Third, the experiments verify the fea-sibility of the novel usage of event cameras in photometry based vision tasks, such as 3D shape reconstruction in wa-ter. 2.