Abstract
We extend panoptic segmentation to the open-world and introduce an open-set panoptic segmentation (OPS) task.
This task requires performing panoptic segmentation for not only known classes but also unknown ones that have not been acknowledged during training. We investigate the practical challenges of the task and construct a bench-mark on top of an existing dataset, COCO. In addition, we propose a novel exemplar-based open-set panoptic seg-mentation network (EOPSN) inspired by exemplar theory.
Our approach identiﬁes a new class based on exemplars, which are identiﬁed by clustering and employed as pseudo-ground-truths. The size of each class increases by mining new exemplars based on the similarities to the existing ones associated with the class. We evaluate EOPSN on the pro-posed benchmark and demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposals. The primary goal of our work is to draw the attention of the community to the recognition in the open-world scenarios. The implementation of our algorithm is available on the project webpage1. 1.

Introduction
For deeper visual understanding, researchers have con-structed large-scale image-based benchmarks [6, 18, 24, 33, 43] and have studied various tasks such as image classiﬁ-cation [14, 47], object detection [10, 23, 41, 42], semantic segmentation [4, 27, 34], instance segmentation [3, 13], and many others. Recently, researchers are getting more inter-ested in ﬁnding the location and shape of instances and es-timating semantic labels from natural scenes since they are critical for high-level understanding of visual content.
Since Kirillov et al. [17] recently formulated a panoptic segmentation task, which is a combination of instance seg-mentation and semantic segmentation, a number of stud-ies [5, 9, 16, 20, 22, 25, 38, 51, 48] have been proposed
∗This work was done during an internship at Adobe Research. 1https://cv.snu.ac.kr/research/EOPSN
Input image
Ground-truth for closed-set
Open-set prediction
Ground-truth for open-set
Figure 1: For a given image, we show the ground-truth for closed-set and open-set panoptic segmentation, where un-labeled regions are in black. In open-set panoptic segmen-tation, a model needs to ﬁnd the unknown class instances, which are not annotated in training data. We assume that
“car” is an unknown class in the open-set visualization. and achieved substantial performance improvements. How-ever, one drawback of the panoptic segmentation task is the excessive cost of dataset construction. The annotation of pixel-level panoptic segmentation labels requires signif-icant human efforts, and is even harder than semantic seg-mentation. It is challenging to create a large-scale dataset containing such comprehensive annotations. There are two potential ways to tackle this problem. The ﬁrst approach is to develop a weakly supervised panoptic segmentation model [21] that is free from pixel-level annotations. The other is to build a generalized model that identiﬁes segments of not only trained classes but also unseen ones. The second approach is closely related to open-set recognition [44] that admits the existence of unknown class in testing.
In this paper, we extend panoptic segmentation to the open-world. Unlike the closed-set counterpart, the new 1175
task has to deal with examples in unknown classes that are not supervised and acknowledged during training. There-fore, the goal of this task is to discover panoptic segmen-tation labels for the examples in both known and unknown classes. We call this new task open-set panoptic segmenta-tion (OPS). We argue that the task is an important milestone for advancing comprehensive visual understanding and it also makes substantial impacts on a wide range of practi-cal applications such as dataset construction, scene analy-sis, and image editing. Figure 1 illustrates an example of
OPS.
We address the following critical challenges in the jour-ney to OPS and make the task tractable using reasonable assumptions2. The ﬁrst challenge comes from the deﬁni-tion of object. Since a certain object may consist of many components that belong to another objects, a coarse-grained object class can be split into multiple sub-categories. For example, a “bus” consists of various parts such as windows, side mirrors, wheels, etc. On the other hand, it is difﬁcult to handle the unknown categories that belong to stuff, e.g.,
“grass” and “water”, since they are often deﬁned as a region and their individual instances are often ill-deﬁned. There-fore, an exhaustive panoptic segmentation for all kinds of objects and backgrounds is almost impossible. The sec-ond issue is that, unlike the open-set image classiﬁcation that discriminates images in unknown classes, the open-set panoptic segmentation requires ﬁnding unknown class ob-jects from a scene even when the unknown class instances, unfortunately, are labeled as background.
We propose an exemplar-based open-set panoptic seg-mentation network (EOPSN) as a strong baseline model for this new task. On top of Panoptic FPN [16], one of the popular closed-set panoptic segmentation approaches, we integrate an extra component that searches for unknown class labels inspired by the exemplar theory [30, 35] in psy-chology. We ﬁrst ﬁnd a new unknown class and its exem-plars by clustering object features and then discover more based on the similarity to existing exemplars during train-ing. Note that the proposed method is generic and appli-cable to any top-down panoptic segmentation method. Ex-perimental results support the effectiveness of the proposed model; EOPSN outperforms the simple baselines, which are variants of [16]. The contribution of this paper is three-fold as follows:
• We deﬁne the open-set panoptic segmentation (OPS) task and make it feasible using reasonable assumptions through in-depth analysis of its inherent challenges.
• We construct a brand-new OPS benchmark by refor-matting COCO [24] and present performance of sev-eral baselines, which are variants of Panoptic FPN. 2Section 3.3 discusses the details.
• We propose a novel framework for open-set panoptic segmentation, EOPSN, based on the exemplar theory, and demonstrate its effectiveness in detecting and seg-menting examples in unknown classes. 2.