Abstract
Automatically generating radiology reports can improve current clinical practice in diagnostic radiology. On one hand, it can relieve radiologists from the heavy burden of report writing; On the other hand, it can remind radi-ologists of abnormalities and avoid the misdiagnosis and missed diagnosis. Yet, this task remains a challenging job for data-driven neural networks, due to the serious visual and textual data biases. To this end, we propose a Posterior-and-Prior Knowledge Exploring-and-Distilling approach (PPKED) to imitate the working patterns of ra-diologists, who will ﬁrst examine the abnormal regions and assign the disease topic tags to the abnormal regions, and then rely on the years of prior medical knowledge and prior working experience accumulations to write reports. Thus, the PPKED includes three modules: Posterior Knowledge
Explorer (PoKE), Prior Knowledge Explorer (PrKE) and
Multi-domain Knowledge Distiller (MKD). In detail, PoKE explores the posterior knowledge, which provides explicit abnormal visual regions to alleviate visual data bias; PrKE explores the prior knowledge from the prior medical knowl-edge graph (medical knowledge) and prior radiology re-ports (working experience) to alleviate textual data bias.
The explored knowledge is distilled by the MKD to gener-ate the ﬁnal reports. Evaluated on MIMIC-CXR and IU-Xray datasets, our method is able to outperform previous state-of-the-art models on these two datasets. 1.

Introduction
Medical images like radiology and pathology images are widely-used in disease diagnosis and treatment [7]. Given a radiology image, radiologists ﬁrst examine both the nor-mal and abnormal regions and then use the learned medical knowledge and accumulated working experience to write a coherent report to note down the ﬁndings [32, 10]. Given
* Corresponding authors.
Figure 1. Two examples of ground truth reports and reports gen-erated by HRNN [19] and our method. The Red colored text in-dicates the abnormalities in reports. The Blue colored text stands for the similar sentences used to describe the normalities in ground truth reports. There are notable data bias and the HRNN fails to de-pict some rare but important abnormalities and generates some er-ror sentences (Underlined text) and repeated sentences (Italic text). the large volume of radiology images, writing reports be-come a heavy burden for radiologists. Furthermore, for less experienced radiologists, some abnormalities in radiology images may be ignored and consequently not included in the reports [4]. To relieve radiologists from such heavy work-load and remind inexperienced radiologists of abnormali-ties, automatically generating radiology reports becomes a critical task in clinical practice.
In recent years, automatic radiology report generation has attracted extensive research interests [47, 22, 41, 14, 6].
Most existing methods, like [15, 43, 46] follow the stan-dard image captioning approaches and employ the encoder-decoder framework, e.g., CNN-HRNN [15, 23]. In the en-coding stage, the image features are extracted by CNN from the entire image; In the decoding stage, the whole report is generated by HRNN. However, directly applying image captioning approaches to radiology images has the follow-13753
ing problems: 1) Visual data deviation: the appearance of normal images dominate the dataset over that of abnormal images [36]. As a result, this unbalanced visual distribution would distracting the model from accurately capturing the features of rare and diverse abnormal regions. 2) Textual data deviation: as shown in Figure 1, in a report, radiol-ogists tend to describe all the items in an image, making the descriptions of normal regions dominate the entire re-port. Besides, many similar sentences are used to describe the same normal regions. With this unbalanced textual dis-tribution, training with such dataset makes the generation of normal sentences dominant [14, 43, 46], disabling the model to describe speciﬁc crucial abnormalities. In brief, as shown in Figure 1, the widely-used HRNN [19] generates some repeated sentences of normalities and fails to depict some rare but important abnormalities.
To ensure these rare but important abnormal regions cap-tured and described, the urgent problem is to solve such se-rious data deviation [36, 22, 14, 20, 47]. In our work, we propose the Posterior-and-Prior Knowledge Exploring-and-Distilling (PPKED) framework, which imitates the radiol-ogists’ working patterns to address above problems. Given a radiology image, radiologists will examine the abnormal regions and assign the disease topic tags to the abnormal re-gions; then accurately write a corresponding report based on years of prior medical knowledge and prior working ex-perience accumulations [10, 7].
In order to model above working patterns, the PPKED introduces three modules, i.e., Posterior Knowledge Explorer (PoKE), Prior Knowl-edge Explorer (PrKE) and Multi-domain Knowledge Dis-tiller (MKD). The PoKE could alleviate visual data devia-tion by extracting the abnormal regions based on the input image; The PrKE could alleviate textual data deviation by encoding the prior knowledge, including the prior radiology reports (i.e., prior working experience) pre-retrieved from the training corpus and the prior medical knowledge graph (i.e., prior medical knowledge), which models the domain-speciﬁc prior knowledge structure and is pre-constructed from the training corpus1. Finally, the MKD focuses on dis-tilling the useful knowledge to generate proper reports. As a result, as shown in Figure 1, our PPKED has higher rate of accurately describing the rare and diverse abnormalities.
In summary, our main contributions are as follows:
• In this paper, to alleviate the data bias problem, we pro-pose the Posterior-and-Prior Knowledge Exploring-and-Distilling approach, which includes the Posterior and Prior Knowledge Explorer (PoKE and PrKE), and
Multi-domain Knowledge Distiller (MKD).
• The PoKE explores posterior knowledge by employ-1For conciseness, in this paper, the prior working experience and the prior medical knowledge denote the retrieved radiology reports and the constructed medical knowledge graph, respectively. ing the disease topic tags to capture the rare, diverse and important abnormal regions; The PrKE explores prior knowledge from prior working experience and prior medical knowledge; The MKD distills the ex-tracted knowledge to generate reports.
• The experiments and analyses on the public IU-Xray and MIMIC-CXR datasets verify the effectiveness of our approach, which is able to outperform previous state-of-the-art model [6] on these two datasets.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 and Section 3 introduce the related works and the proposed approach, respectively, followed by the experimental results (see Section 4) and our conclusion (see Section 5). 2.