Abstract
On existing public benchmarks, face forgery detection techniques have achieved great success. However, when used in multi-person videos, which often contain many peo-ple active in the scene with only a small subset having been manipulated, their performance remains far from being sat-isfactory. To take face forgery detection to a new level, we construct a novel large-scale dataset, called FFIW10K, which comprises 10,000 high-quality forgery videos, with an average of three human faces in each frame.
The manipulation procedure is fully automatic, controlled by a domain-adversarial quality assessment network, making
In ad-our dataset highly scalable with low human cost. dition, we propose a novel algorithm to tackle the task of multi-person face forgery detection.
Supervised by only video-level label, the algorithm explores multiple in-stance learning and learns to automatically attend to tam-pered faces. Our algorithm outperforms representative ap-proaches for both forgery classiﬁcation and localization on
FFIW10K, and also shows high generalization ability on ex-isting benchmarks. We hope that our dataset and study will help the community to explore this new ﬁeld in more depth. 1.

Introduction
The rise of synthetic audiovisual media is forcing us to-wards a critical and unsettling realization: our belief that video and audio recordings are reliable representations of reality is no longer tenable. In particular, since emerging in 2017, the deepfake phenomenon has grown rapidly, re-quiring face forensics to recognize potentially manipulated facial regions in images and videos. Accurate face forgery detection1 would have an immediate and far-reaching im-pact in alleviating the malicious intents of deepfakes, such as, face recognition attacks [42] and fake news [36, 4].
To help with this, several benchmarks have been estab-lished. The pioneering large-scale dataset, i.e., FaceForen-sics++ [63], has greatly contributed to spurring interest and
Figure 1: Representative examples from FFIW10K , showing multi-person video frames with only a few faces being forged.
Can you recognize the manipulated ones?2 progress in the area of face forgery detection. However, as algorithms evolve, there have been signs of performance saturation on this dataset [62]. More recent datasets (e.g.,
DeeperForensics-1.0 [37], DFDC [22], Celeb-DF[50]) thus employ more advanced synthesis techniques to produce highly realistic tampered faces. Even so, all previous datasets are subject to a signiﬁcant limitation: they have a strong selection bias [69] to favor trimmed videos, each of which involves only one person. Thus, they provide insufﬁ-cient representation of true visual world, which makes them inappropriate and unreliable to evaluate face forgery detec-tion models in real-world, multi-person circumstances.
To take the research of face forensics into a new level, we introduce a new large-scale dataset, called FFIW10K, pro-moting empirical study of face forgery detection in multi-person scenarios. In FFIW10K, each video involves multiple individuals but only some, not all, faces are manipulated (see Fig. 1). This raises a signiﬁcant challenge to current techniques: even for the fake videos, real faces are still in the majority. In particular, FFIW10K features 10,000 high-ﬁdelity manipulated videos, with 12 seconds long on aver-age, resulting in 33 hours of video in total. In comparison with existing datasets, FFIW10K has several distinguished features: i) Real-world complexity. The number of identities in each frame ranges from one to ﬁfteen, with three on av-erage, yielding a better representation of real visual scenes. ii) High ﬁdelity with low human cost. The synthesis qual-ity is controlled by a quality assessment network (Q-Net), which provides an effortless way to measure the realism of
*Corresponding author: Wenguan Wang. 1In this work, “forgery” refers to altering imagery by swapping faces. 2Answer: The middle person in the left image and the rightmost of the back row in the right image are fake. 5778
forged faces. iii) Large scale. FFIW10K is comparable to the largest current dataset [37] in terms of the number of unique fake videos (see Table 1), and, more importantly, provides videos under multi-person settings.
FFIW10K provides both video- and face-level annota-tions, allowing benchmarking methods on both forgery clas-siﬁcation and localization tasks. In addition, to bring the research into a more natural setting, FFIW10K provides two benchmark settings. In the ﬁrst setting, benchmarking methods can make use of face-level supervision. However, in the second one, only video-level labels are allowed to be accessed during training. This makes the task more valuable from both academic and practical perspectives.
Along with FFIW10K, we propose a discriminative atten-tion model for face forgery classiﬁcation and localization in multi-person scenarios. The model explores the idea of multiple instance learning [20, 52] and can be trained with video-level label only. It comprises three essential parts: i) a multi-temporal-scale instance feature aggregation module that summarizes short-term, long-term and global features of each face tracklet to obtain a robust and discriminative representation; ii) an attention-based bag feature aggrega-tion module that adaptively aggregates the representations of all face tracklets into a video-level representation; and iii) a sparse regularization loss to enforce the sparsity of face selection for real/fake discrimination. The sparsity-regularized attention learning mechanism is tasked with au-tomatically selecting possible tampered faces during classi-ﬁcation, promoting the localization ability of the system.
In summary, our contributions are three-fold: i) To pave the avenue for face forgery detection in open world, we con-tribute FFIW10K dataset to the community, which is dis-tinctive in its real-world complexity. As far we know, it is the ﬁrst large-scale face forensics dataset for fully uncon-ii) We pro-strained, multi-person face forgery detection. pose a model-agnostic quality assessment model for synthe-sis quality management. Trained independently of deepfake methods, the model has high ﬂexibility and accessibility, iii) We pro-and can facilitate future dataset construction. pose a discriminative attention model for multi-person face forgery detection. By revisiting multiple instance learning and gathering diverse temporal context, it provides promis-ing performance on both fake video classiﬁcation and fake face localization tasks with only video-level supervision. 2.