Abstract
Source
Functional Map
Adjoint +
Fast Sinkhorn Filter
In this paper, we provide a theoretical foundation for pointwise map recovery from functional maps and highlight its relation to a range of shape correspondence methods based on spectral alignment. With this analysis in hand, we develop a novel spectral registration technique: Fast
Sinkhorn Filters, which allows for the recovery of accu-rate and bijective pointwise correspondences with a su-perior time and memory complexity in comparison to ex-isting approaches. Our method combines the simple and concise representation of correspondence using functional maps with the matrix scaling schemes from computational optimal transport. By exploiting the sparse structure of the kernel matrices involved in the transport map computation, we provide an efﬁcient trade-off between acceptable accu-racy and complexity for the problem of dense shape corre-spondence, while promoting bijectivity.1 1.

Introduction
Non-rigid shape matching remains at the core of many computer vision tasks including statistical shape analysis
[4], texture mapping [10], and deformation transfer, [41], among others.
Among many existing approaches for this problem [43, 38], a prominent overall strategy is to exploit spectral quan-tities, such as the eigenfunctions of the Laplace-Beltrami operator, which are naturally invariant to isometric shape deformations. Within this category, the functional map framework, introduced in [28] proposes an efﬁcient way to represent and compute mappings and achieves the state-of-the-art accuracy in difﬁcult shape matching problems [23].
One of the advantages of this framework is that it al-lows to formulate shape correspondence as a simple opti-mization problem relating the basis functions on the two shapes, from which a dense point-to-point correspondence can be extracted. This framework has been successfully ap-1Demo code: https://github.com/paigautam/CVPR21_
FastSinkhornFilters
Figure 1: We formally justify pointwise map recovery from functional maps using the adjoint, and introduce Fast
Sinkhorn Filters: an efﬁcient method promoting bijectivity in this process. This yields better pointwise maps (color transfer) with improvement in bijectivity (errors in red). plied in both axiomatic [28, 16, 14, 32] and learning-based
[18, 35, 13, 8] settings. However, one of the recurring issues of virtually all works in this domain, is deﬁning and using the exact relation between functional and pointwise maps.
This problem is especially relevant in the conversion step from functional to point-to-point correspondences. This conversion has been speciﬁcally treated in several works, including [28, 33, 11, 34, 15, 45, 23] among others. De-spite this signiﬁcant effort, the precise rigorous relation be-tween the two representations still remains ill-deﬁned. In this paper, we provide a rigorous theoretical justiﬁcation for pointwise conversion from a functional map, and dis-cuss how it is related to the problem of aligning the spectral embeddings of non-rigid shapes. We highlight that unlike a functional map, which is not well-suited for pointwise con-version, the adjoint operator can naturally be used for point-to-point map extraction both theoretically in the smooth set-ting, and in practice on discrete shapes.
With this foundation in hand, we propose a general framework for iterative spectral alignment, and illustrate that many previous shape matching methods are regular-ized variants of our meta algorithm. Finally, we introduce an effective regularized procedure using Sinkhorn’s algo-rithm to compute accurate near-bijective pointwise corre-spondences that can scale to densely-sampled shapes. We
ﬁnd that existing approaches do not allow the recovery of an accurate, smooth and bijective point-to-point correspon-dence with acceptable time and memory complexity. Such methods are either too inaccurate (e.g., nearest-neighbor), 384
or too time and memory consuming (e.g., linear-assignment solvers) thereby making them infeasible for practical appli-cations.
We use our analysis of spectral alignment to construct a sparse kernel assignment matrix which is then efﬁciently processed using matrix scaling to output an entropic regu-larized transport plan. Finally by extracting the maximum likelihood estimate of this plan, we demonstrate that our ap-proach, termed Fast Sinkorn Filters, produces accurate re-sults often at a fraction of the cost of existing methods in both direct and iterative pointwise conversion applications. 2.