Abstract
Proteins’ biological functions are deﬁned by the geomet-ric and chemical structure of their 3D molecular surfaces.
Recent works have shown that geometric deep learning can be used on mesh-based representations of proteins to iden-tify potential functional sites, such as binding targets for potential drugs. Unfortunately though, the use of meshes as the underlying representation for protein structure has mul-tiple drawbacks including the need to pre-compute the input features and mesh connectivities. This becomes a bottleneck for many important tasks in protein science.
In this paper, we present a new framework for deep learning on protein structures that addresses these limita-tions. Among the key advantages of our method are the com-putation and sampling of the molecular surface on-the-ﬂy from the underlying atomic point cloud and a novel efﬁcient geometric convolutional layer. As a result, we are able to process large collections of proteins in an end-to-end fash-ion, taking as the sole input the raw 3D coordinates and chemical types of their atoms, eliminating the need for any hand-crafted pre-computed features.
To showcase the performance of our approach, we test it on two tasks in the ﬁeld of protein structural bioinformat-ics: the identiﬁcation of interaction sites and the prediction of protein-protein interactions. On both tasks, we achieve state-of-the-art performance with much faster run times and fewer parameters than previous models. These results will considerably ease the deployment of deep learning methods in protein science and open the door for end-to-end differ-entiable approaches in protein modeling tasks such as func-tion prediction and design. 1.

Introduction
Proteins are biomacromolecules central to all living or-ganisms. Their function is a determining factor in health and disease, and being able to predict functional proper-ties of proteins is of the utmost importance to developing novel drug therapies. From a chemical perspective, pro-(a) Folding and design. (b) Interacting surfaces.
Figure 1: Three major problems in structural biology. (a) Protein design is the inverse problem of structure predic-tion. (b) Two interacting proteins represented as an atomic point cloud (left) and as a molecular surface (right) that abstracts out the internal fold (shown semi-transparently).
Protein surfaces display a number of geometric (e.g. con-cave and convex regions) and chemical (e.g. charges) fea-tures. Identifying their binding is a complex problem that can be addressed with geometric deep learning. teins are polymers composed of a sequence of amino acids (Fig. 1.a). This sequence determines the structural con-formation (fold) of the protein, and the structure in turn determines its function. In a folded protein, hydrophobic (water-repelling) residues typically cluster within the core of the protein, while hydrophilic (water-attracting) residues are exposed to water solvent on its surface. The properties of this surface dictate the type and the strength of the inter-actions that a protein can have with other molecules (Fig. 1.b). Analysing this complex 3D object is therefore a fun-damental problem in biology: models for protein structures can be used to understand the possible interactions between a protein and its environment, and consequently predict the functions of these macromolecules in living organisms.
Since proteins are predominant drug targets, the study of their interactions with other molecules is a key problem for fundamental biology and the pharmaceutical industry.
Classical drugs are small molecules designed to bind to a protein of interest, with a binding site that usually has no-ticeable ‘pocket-like’ structure. Targets with ﬂat surfaces that exhibit no pockets have long been a challenge for drug developers and are often deemed ‘undruggable’. The possi-bility of addressing such targets with speciﬁcally designed 15272
protein molecules (known as biological drugs or ‘biolog-ics’) is a fast emerging ﬁeld in drug-development holding the promise to provide novel therapeutic strategies for many important diseases (e.g. cancer, viral infections).
Deep learning methods have increasingly been applied to a broad range of problems in protein science [22], with the particularly notable success of DeepMind’s AlphaFold to predict 3D protein structure from sequence [38]. Recently,
Gainza et al. [21] introduced MaSIF, one of the ﬁrst con-ceptual approaches for geometric deep learning on protein molecular surfaces allowing to predict their binding. The main limitations of MaSIF stem from its reliance on pre-computed meshes and handcrafted features, as well as sig-niﬁcant computational time and memory requirements.
Main contributions.
In this paper, we present dMaSIF (differentiable molecular surface interaction ﬁngerprinting), a deep learning approach to identify interaction patterns on protein surfaces that addresses the key drawbacks of MaSIF.
Our architecture is free of any precomputed features.
It operates directly on the large set of atoms that compose the protein, generates a point cloud representation for the protein surface, learns task-speciﬁc geometric and chemical features on the surface point cloud and ﬁnally applies a new convolutional operator that approximates geodesic coordi-nates in the tangent space. All these computations are per-formed on the ﬂy, with a small memory footprint. Notably, we implement all core calculations as reductions of “sym-bolic matrices”, supported by the recent KeOps library [19] for PyTorch [31]. These high performance routines let us design a method which is fully differentiable and an order of magnitude faster and more memory efﬁcient than MaSIF.
This in turn allows us to make predictions on larger col-lections of protein structures than was previously practical, and opens the door to end-to-end protein optimization and de novo protein design using geometric deep learning. 2.