Abstract
We consider the challenging blind denoising problem for
Poisson-Gaussian noise, in which no additional information about clean images or noise level parameters is available.
Particularly, when only “single” noisy images are avail-able for training a denoiser, the denoising performance of existing methods was not satisfactory. Recently, the blind pixelwise afﬁne image denoiser (BP-AIDE) was proposed and signiﬁcantly improved the performance in the above setting, to the extent that it is competitive with denoisers which utilized additional information. However, BP-AIDE seriously suffered from slow inference time due to the inef-ﬁciency of noise level estimation procedure and that of the blind-spot network (BSN) architecture it used. To that end, we propose Fast Blind Image Denoiser (FBI-Denoiser) for
Poisson-Gaussian noise, which consists of two neural net-work models; 1) PGE-Net that estimates Poisson-Gaussian noise parameters 2000 times faster than the conventional methods and 2) FBI-Net that realizes a much more efﬁcient
BSN for pixelwise afﬁne denoiser in terms of the number of parameters and inference speed. Consequently, we show that our FBI-Denoiser blindly trained solely based on single noisy images can achieve the state-of-the-art performance on several real-world noisy image benchmark datasets with much faster inference time (×10), compared to BP-AIDE. 1.

Introduction
Convolutional neural network (CNN)-based denoisers achieved impressive state-of-the-art denoising performances mainly by utilizing the supervised learning approach based on collecting many clean and noisy image pairs. The perfor-mance gain was ﬁrst shown in the additive white Gaussian noise setting [47, 42, 48, 26, 36, 14], then the approach was extended also to the Poisson-Gaussian noise setting, which better models the real-world source-dependent noise. It was
∗Equal contribution.
†Corresponding author (E-mail: tsmoon@snu.ac.kr) demonstrated that the gain was attained not only with respect to the quantitative metrics, e.g., PSNR or SSIM [44], on the real-world noise benchmarks such as DND [35], SIDD [3] and FMD [49], but also with respect to the inference time for denoising (using GPUs), compared to the more conventional prior- or optimization-based methods [17, 21].
Despite above promising achievements, the plain super-vised learning approach has a critical drawback in a more practical, real-world setting, since the availability of the enough number of the clean-noisy images pairs for training is sometimes a luxury that cannot be simply assumed. For example, in medical imaging (CT or MRI), obtaining the un-derlying clean image for a noisy image becomes extremely time-consuming and expensive. In order to overcome this drawback, several attempts have been made in recent years.
The ﬁrst approach is to utilize unpaired clean images and generate synthetic noisy images to again carry on the su-pervised training with the generated pairs. For example, in
[7, 46], based on in-camera signal processing (ISP) pipeline and speciﬁc Poisson-Gaussian noise parameters, they gener-ated synthetic noisy sRGB or rawRGB images from clean sRGB images. Another examples can be found in [45, 16], in which they learned a model to generate noise present in the given noisy images, then used that model to corrupt the clean images to build paired supervised training set. While these approaches were shown to achieve good performance for some speciﬁc settings, they either lack generalities or have limited performance for real-world noisy image denoising.
The second recent approach to remove the requirement of clean-noisy pairs is to train a denoiser solely based on noisy images [25, 23, 6, 24, 38, 34, 13, 41]. However, those meth-ods also had their own limitations, such as requiring pairs of independently realized noisy images for the same clean source [25, 50], poor performance on benchmark datasets
[23, 6], large inference time due to requiring many number of samplings [38], or limited or no experiment on real-world noise setting [24, 34, 41, 50, 13].
Recently, BP-AIDE [10], which extends the framework of [12, 11], was proposed as another attempt to lift the re-quirement of clean images. Namely, the scheme made a 5768
unique combination of Generalized Anscombe Transforma-tion (GAT) [5], Poisson-Gaussian noise estimation [28, 20], and an unbiased estimator of MSE for pixelwise afﬁne de-noisers proposed in [11] in order to train a blind denoiser for Poisson-Gaussian noise solely on single noisy images with no additional information. The method achieved the state-of-the-art performance on several benchmarks for real-world noise [49, 3, 35] compared to the methods [23, 17] that operate in the identical setting. However, BP-AIDE had one critical limitation; it suffers from the slow infer-ence time due to the following two reasons. First, for every given noisy image, BP-AIDE must separately carry out the
Poisson-Gaussian noise parameter estimation, which usu-ally takes a couple of seconds for moderately sized images.
Second, the method simply utilizes the so-called blind-spot network (BSN) architecture proposed in [12] as a denoiser, but the corresponding structure is quite complex and requires large GPU memory, leading to a slow inference time.
To tackle above limitation, we make two signiﬁcant im-provements on BP-AIDE and propose Fast Blind Image
Denoiser (FBI-Denoiser). Firstly, we propose PGE (Poisson-Gaussian Estimation)-Net, which learns to estimate the
Poisson-Gaussian noise parameters solely from noisy im-ages by converting GAT and Gaussian noise estimation steps to tensor operations and by proposing a novel loss function.
Secondly, we devise FBI-Net, a new compact fully convolu-tional BSN, which performs almost the same as the network in [12] but signiﬁcantly reduces the inference time. The
FBI-Denoiser is trained in two steps; ﬁrst train PGE-Net with noisy images, then train FBI-Net again with the same noisy images and the outputs of PGE-Net, following the pro-cedures of BP-AIDE. As a result, we signiﬁcantly improve the inference time of BP-AIDE (×10 speed-up) as well as achieve the state-of-the-art blind denoising performance on real-world noise benchmarks [49, 3, 35]. 2.