Abstract
We propose a fully convolutional multi-person pose es-timation framework using dynamic instance-aware convo-lutions, termed FCPose. Different from existing methods, which often require ROI (Region of Interest) operations and/or grouping post-processing, FCPose eliminates the
ROIs and grouping post-processing with dynamic instance-aware keypoint estimation heads. The dynamic keypoint heads are conditioned on each instance (person), and can encode the instance concept in the dynamically-generated weights of their ﬁlters. Moreover, with the strong represen-tation capacity of dynamic convolutions, the keypoint heads in FCPose are designed to be very compact, resulting in fast inference and making FCPose have almost constant in-ference time regardless of the number of persons in the im-age. For example, on the COCO dataset, a real-time version of FCPose using the DLA-34 backbone infers about 4.5×
*Corresponding author (email: chunhua@icloud.com). faster than Mask R-CNN (ResNet-101) (41.67 FPS vs. 9.26
FPS) while achieving improved performance (64.8% APkp vs. 64.3% APkp). FCPose also offers better speed/accuracy trade-off than other state-of-the-art methods. Our exper-iment results show that FCPose is a simple yet effective multi-person pose estimation framework. Code is available at: https://git.io/AdelaiDet 1.

Introduction
Multi-person pose estimation (a.k.a., keypoint detection) aims to obtain the keypoint locations of the persons in an image, which is one of the fundamental computer vision tasks with many downstream applications.
The key challenge in multi-person keypoint detection is how to obtain the instance-level keypoints. In other words, the detected keypoints need to be grouped according to the instance that they belong to. Currently, the mainstream methods tackle this challenge with bottom-up or top-down 9034
tection. Our solution is simple yet effective, and is able to avoid the shortcomings of the previous ROI-based or grouping-based methods. The key idea of our solution is to use the keypoint heads whose convolution ﬁlters/weights are dynamically generated. More speciﬁcally, for each in-stance, we dynamically generate a keypoint head. The generated keypoint head is applied to convolutional fea-ture maps in the fashion of fully convolutional networks.
As a result, we are able to obtain the keypoint detection results only for that speciﬁc target instance, as shown in
Fig. 3. This is made possible as the keypoint head can encode the instance’s characteristics in the ﬁlters’ weights.
Thus, this keypoint head can distinguish the instance’s key-points from that of other instances, hence instance-speciﬁc convolution ﬁlters. If we consider that the ROI operations in top-down methods are the operations making the model attend to an instance, then in our method, so do the dynamic instance-aware keypoint heads. This idea eliminates the need for ROIs and the grouping post-processing, thus by-passing the drawbacks mentioned before. Additionally, the dynamically-generated keypoint head is very compact and only has several thousand coefﬁcients. Thus, it can infer very fast, making the overall inference time almost remain the same regardless of the number of persons in a test im-age. This is particularly valuable for real-time applications.
Moreover, it is easy to see that the localization preci-sion of keypoint detection is tightly related to the output resolution of the FCN. Typically, the output resolution of the fully convolutional keypoint heads is designed to that of the input feature maps (e.g., 1/8 of the input image), which is not sufﬁcient for keypoint detection. Simply using de-convolutions, as in Mask R-CNN [8], to upsample the out-puts would inevitably result in signiﬁcantly increased com-putation overhead. Here, we tackle this dilemma of accu-racy vs. computation complexity by proffering a new key-point reﬁnement module. As shown in Table 4, compared with the baseline, our proposed keypoint reﬁnement can dramatically improve the accuracy (56.2% vs. 63.0% APkp) with negligible computation overhead (69 ms vs. 71 ms).
We summarize our contributions as follows.
• We propose an efﬁcient and accurate human pose es-timation framework, termed FCPose, built upon dy-namic ﬁlters [13]. For the ﬁrst time, we demonstrate that an ROI-free and grouping-free end-to-end train-able human pose estimator can achieve even better ac-curacy and speed, comparing favourably with recent top-down and bottom-up methods.
• The elimination of ROIs enables FCPose to be imple-mented by only convolution operations, resulting in much easier deployment in cases such as on mobile devices. Moreover, not using ROIs also avoids that the keypoint prediction is truncated by the inaccurate 9035
Figure 2 – The trade-off between speed and accuracy. In-ference time is measured on a single 1080Ti GPU. We report the APkp on the COCO val2017 dataset. FCPose (DLA-34 backbone [33]) is up to 13× faster than previous state-of-the-art methods and achieves real-time speed with competitive ac-It is worth noting that in the fast/real-time keypoint curacy. detection realm, which is previously dominated by bottom-up methods, FCPose surpasses them both in speed and accuracy.
This suggests that FCPose serve as a new strong baseline for real-time keypoint detection. approaches. Top-down methods [8, 27] ﬁrst detect each in-dividual instance with a person detector. These detected boxes form the ROIs and an ROI operation is used to crop the person from either the feature maps or the original im-age. Next, single person keypoint detection is performed within a ROI for each person, individually. The ROI-based pipeline may come with some drawbacks. First, the ROIs are forwarded separately and thus the convolutional compu-tation cannot be shared. As a result, the inference time of these methods heavily depends on the number of instances in the image, which impedes these methods from being real-time, as shown in our experiments. Second, top-down methods usually are not end-to-end trainable since the ROIs are often obtained from an isolated person detector such as
Faster R-CNN [25]. Moreover, the use of the isolated detec-tor also results in signiﬁcantly longer end-to-end inference time (i.e., from the raw image to the ﬁnal keypoint results).
Third, these ROI-based methods also rely on the localiza-tion quality of the ROIs. This may harm the keypoint de-tection performance if the detector yields inaccurate boxes.
On the other hand, bottom-up methods [2,20] do not rely on
ROIs. They ﬁrst detect instance-agnostic keypoints and then employ grouping post-processing to obtain the full-body re-sults for each instance. The processing of assembling the keypoints is usually heuristic and can involves many hyper-parameters, making these methods complicated.
In this work, we propose a new solution to keypoint de-detected boxes as in ROI-based frameworks such as
Mask R-CNN [8] (e.g., see Fig. 5).
• The core of FCPose is the use of the dynamic ﬁl-ters in our keypoint heads. Dynamically generated ﬁl-ters have demonstrated strong representation capaci-ties. Thus, we only need a small number of such con-volutions for achieving top results. As a result, the keypoint heads are very compact and thus the over-all inference time is fast and almost constant regard-less of the number of the instances in the image. We also present a real-time end-to-end keypoint detection models with competitive performance. The trade-off between speed and accuracy is shown in Fig. 2. We believe that FCPose can be a new strong baseline for keypoint detection, particularly in the real-time realm. 2.