Abstract
Forecasting Parapapillary atrophy (PPA), i.e., a symptom related to most irreversible eye diseases, provides an alarm for implementing an intervention to slow down the disease progression at early stage. A key question for this forecast is: how to fully utilize the historical data (e.g., retinal image) up to the current stage for future disease prediction? In this paper, we provide an answer with a novel framework, namely Disease Forecast via Progression Learning (DFPL), which exploits the irreversibility prior (i.e., cannot be re-versed once diagnosed). Speciﬁcally, based on this prior, we decompose two factors that contribute to the prediction of the future disease: i) the current disease label given the data (retinal image, clinical attributes) at present and ii) the future disease label given the progression of the retinal images that from the current to the future. To model these two factors, we introduce the current and progression pre-dictors in DFPL, respectively. In order to account for the degree of progression of the disease, we propose a temporal generative model to accurately generate the future image and compare it with the current one to get a residual image.
The generative model is implemented by a recurrent neural network, in order to exploit the dependency of the historical data. To verify our approach, we apply it to a PPA in-house dataset and it yields a signiﬁcant improvement (e.g., 4.48% of accuracy; 3.45% of AUC) over others. Besides, our gen-erative model can accurately localize the disease-related regions. 1.

Introduction
The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that 19 million children below the age of 15 were visually impaired
[18; 6] (1% of the total population in this age group). Most of the eye diseases, such as myopia in children [14], glaucoma
* denotes equal contribution.
[26], retinal detachment, and dense cataract [11], are highly related to Parapapillary atrophy (PPA), which as a biomarker of above eye diseases, refers to outer retinal atrophy adjacent to the optic disc [23; 17; 3]. Due to the irreversibility of these eye diseases, forecasted PPA can be provided as an alarm to implement an intervention (e.g., outdoor activities, or drug treatment) to prevent the rapid progression of eye diseases at the early stage. Due to the lack of future data when forecasting the future label, this forecasting task is equivalent to the following answer: how to fully utilize the longitudinal/sequential data up to the current stage for future disease prediction, under the lack of future data?
A series of works have recently been proposed to answer this question, such as [21; 15; 24]. Most of these works uti-lized the provided current data for generating the future med-ical data (i.e., retinal images, clinical attributes), followed by an auxiliary classiﬁer for disease prediction. However, these methods did not take the irreversibility medical prior into account.
This irreversibility prior overlooked in the above litera-ture refers to that, the disease cannot reverse to healthy once diagnosed. That is, if diagnosed as diseased at present, the probability of disease at the future stage would be 100%.
Inspired by such a prior in PPA[12], we decompose (accord-ing to the law of total probability) the disease label at future stage into two factors: i) the disease label at current stage given the medical data at present; and ii) the disease label at future stage given the progression from the current to the future stage. This factorization, in contrast to previous works that only leverage current data for the generation, claims an additional role of current data in determining the disease at present (a.k.a the i)). To effectively learn these two factors, we propose a novel framework, namely Disease Forecast via Progression Learning (DFPL) which introduces two pre-diction modules: fcur and fprog, respectively. To further account for the degree of progression, we propose a tempo-ral generative framework based on Generative Adversarial
Networks (GAN), in which we incorporate the generator 18117
with the recurrent neural network that takes prior sequential data as input to predict the feature map in the next stage.
By comparing this generated feature map with the one at the current stage, one can get the residual feature map, as a measurement of the degree of progression.
To validate the utility of our approach, we apply it to a in-house data which belongs to a longitude PPA protocol for clinical diagnosis for primary-school-aged children. The results show a large improvement over others in terms of prediction accuracy (ACC) and Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC): e.g., 4.48% of accuracy; 3.45% of AUC. Besides, the visualization result shows that our DFPL equipped with temporal generative learning can localize the disease-related regions such as optic disc. An ablation study is further conducted to verify the contribution of each module of our framework. The main contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We are the ﬁrst to point out the two-fold effects from the longitudinal data up to the current stage to the forecast for irreversible diseases: the disease status at present and the one based on progression from the current stage.
We propose a novel framework to learn such two effects.
• We propose a temporal generative framework equipped with a recurrent neural network, to learn the dynamics of disease progression.
• Our method can achieve better prediction results than others on an in-house PPA data of primary-school-aged children; besides, the detected disease-related regions can be concentrated on the optic disc. 2.