Abstract
One of the main challenges for arbitrary-shaped tex-t detection is to design a good text instance representation that allows networks to learn diverse text geometry vari-ances. Most of existing methods model text instances in im-age spatial domain via masks or contour point sequences in the Cartesian or the polar coordinate system. Howev-er, the mask representation might lead to expensive post-processing, while the point sequence one may have limit-ed capability to model texts with highly-curved shapes. To tackle these problems, we model text instances in the Fouri-er domain and propose one novel Fourier Contour Em-bedding (FCE) method to represent arbitrary shaped tex-t contours as compact signatures. We further construct
FCENet with a backbone, feature pyramid networks (FP-N) and a simple post-processing with the Inverse Fourier
Transformation (IFT) and Non-Maximum Suppression (N-MS). Different from previous methods, FCENet ﬁrst pre-dicts compact Fourier signatures of text instances, and then reconstructs text contours via IFT and NMS during test.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that FCE is accurate and robust to ﬁt contours of scene texts even with highly-curved shapes, and also validate the effectiveness and the good generalization of FCENet for arbitrary-shaped tex-t detection. Furthermore, experimental results show that our FCENet is superior to the state-of-the-art (SOTA) meth-ods on CTW1500 and Total-Text, especially on challenging highly-curved text subset. 1.

Introduction
Beneﬁting from the development of object detection [3, 9,10,16,23] and instance segmentation [4,11], text detection
†Yiqin Zhu and Jianyong Chen contributed equally to this work.
∗Corresponding authors: Lingyu Liang, Zhanghui Kuang. This research is supported by NSFC (Grant No.61936003), GD-NSF (Grant
No.2017A030312006, No.2019A1515011045), SenseTime Research Fund for Young Scholars and CAAI-Huawei MindSpore Open Fund.
K=5
K=25
K=125
Ground-Truth (a) Fourier contour ﬁtting with progressive approximation. (b) TextRay contour [25] (c) Fourier contour
Figure 1: Comparison with Fourier contour and TextRay contour [25] representations. (a) shows Fourier contour can
ﬁt extremely complicated object shapes and get better ap-proximation as the Fourier degree k increases. (b) and (c) compare the TextRay contours and our proposed Fourier contours, where the ground-truth contours are in green and the reconstructed ones are in red. TextRay fails to model highly-curved texts (best viewed in color). has achieved signiﬁcant progress [1,7,8,14,22,24,25,27–29, 31, 35–37]. Text detection methods can be roughly divided into segmentation-based approaches [14, 15, 19, 21, 22, 24, 27, 28, 30, 32], and regression-based approaches [12, 25, 33, 35, 36].
Recent research focus has shifted from horizontal or multi-oriented text detection [7, 22, 31, 37] to more chal-lenging arbitrary-shaped text detection [1, 8, 14, 24, 25, 27–29, 35, 36]. Compared to multi-oriented text detec-tion, text instance representations play an indispensable role in arbitrary-shaped text detection. A good represen-tation should be simple and compact with good general-ization ability to avoid overﬁtting. However, designing 3123
a compact text instance representation is not straightfor-ward, because ﬁtting diverse geometry variances of tex-t instances is challenging. Existing arbitrary-shaped tex-t detection approaches represent text instances in the spa-tial domain of images. They models texts via per-pixel masks [1, 8, 14, 24, 27–29, 32], contour point sequences in the Cartesian system [12, 35, 36] or those in the polar sys-tem [25]. Spatial domain based methods have clear draw-backs. Mask representation may lead to intrinsically com-putationally expensive post-processing, and frequently re-quires large training data, and contour point sequences may have limited capability to model highly-curved texts.
In this paper, we model text instance contours in the
Fourier domain instead of the spatial domain via the Fouri-er transformation, which can ﬁt any closed contour with progressive approximation in a robust and simple manner.
Fig. 1a illustrates that Fourier transformation can accurate-ly ﬁt extremely complicated shapes (e.g., a portrait sketch) with very compact signatures (e.g., K = 125 only), and shows that as the Fourier degree k increases, the recon-structed shape approximates the ground truth better. Com-pared to TextRay [25], a SOTA text contour point sequence in the polar coordinate system, our proposed Fourier con-tour representation can model high-curved texts better as shown in Fig. 1b-c.
To this end, we propose Fourier Contour Embedding (FCE) method to convert text instance contours from point sequences into Fourier signature vectors. Firstly, we pro-pose a resampling scheme to obtain a ﬁxed number of dense points on each text contour. To maintain the uniqueness of the resulted Fourier signature vector, we set the right-most intersection between the text contour and the horizon-tal line through the text center point as the sampling start point, ﬁx the sampling direction as the clockwise direction, and keep the sampling interval along the text contour un-changed. Secondly, the sampled point sequences of con-tours in the spatial domain are embedded into the Fourier domain via the Fourier transformation (FT).
The advantages of FCE for text instance representation are three-fold:
•
•
•
Flexible: Any closed contour, including extremely complicated shapes, can accurately be ﬁtted;
Compactness: The Fourier signature vectors are com-pact. In our experiments, our proposed FCE with the degree K = 5 can achieve very accurate approxima-tion of texts.
Simplicity: The conversion between a sampled point sequence and a Fourier signature vector of text con-tours is formulated as FT and Inverse FT. So the FCE method is easy to implement without introducing com-plex post-processing.
Equipped with the FCE, we further construct FCENet for arbitrary-shaped text detection. Particularly, it consists of a backbone of ResNet50 with deformable convolutional net-works (DCN) [38], feature pyramid networks (FPN) [9] and the Fourier prediction header. The header has two individ-ual branches. Namely, the classiﬁcation branch, and the re-gression branch. The former predicts text region masks and text center region masks. The latter predicts text Fourier signature vectors in the Fourier domain, which are fed into the Inverse Fourier Transformation (IFT) to reconstruct text contour point sequences. Ground truth text contour point sequences are used as supervision signals. Thanks to the re-sampling scheme of FCE, our loss in the regression branch is compatible across different datasets, although datasets such as CTW1500 [13] and Total-Text [2] have different numbers of contour points for each text instance.
Experiments validate the effectiveness and good gener-alization ability of FCENet for arbitrary shaped text detec-tion. Moreover, our FCENet is superior to the state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods on CTW1500 and Total-Text, especial-ly on their highly-curved text subset.
We summarize the contributions of this work as follows:
•
•
•
We propose Fourier Contour Embedding (FCE) method, which can accurately approximate any closed shapes, including arbitrary shaped text contours, as compact Fourier signature vectors.
We propose FCENet which ﬁrst predicts Fourier sig-nature vectors of text instances in the Fourier domain, and then reconstructs text contour point sequences in the image spatial domain via Inverse Fourier Transfor-mation (IFT). It can be learned end-to-end, and be in-ferred without any complex post processing.
We extensively evaluate the proposed FCE and
FCENet. Experimental results validate the good rep-resentation of FCE, especially on highly-curved texts, the generalization ability of FCENet when training on small datasets. Moreover, it has been shown that
FCENet achieves the state-of-the-art performance on
CTW1500 and Total-Text. 2.