Abstract 6D pose estimation from a single RGB image is a funda-mental task in computer vision. The current top-performing deep learning-based methods rely on an indirect strategy, i.e., ﬁrst establishing 2D-3D correspondences between the coordinates in the image plane and object coordinate sys-tem, and then applying a variant of the PnP/RANSAC al-gorithm. However, this two-stage pipeline is not end-to-end trainable, thus is hard to be employed for many tasks requiring differentiable poses. On the other hand, meth-ods based on direct regression are currently inferior to geometry-based methods. In this work, we perform an in-depth investigation on both direct and indirect methods, and propose a simple yet effective Geometry-guided Direct Re-gression Network (GDR-Net) to learn the 6D pose in an end-to-end manner from dense correspondence-based inter-mediate geometric representations. Extensive experiments show that our approach remarkably outperforms state-of-the-art methods on LM, LM-O and YCB-V datasets. Code is available at https://git.io/GDR-Net. 1.

Introduction
Estimating the 6D pose, i.e. the 3D rotation and 3D translation, of objects with respect to the camera is a fun-It has wide appli-damental problem in computer vision. cability to many real-world tasks such as robotic manip-ulation [10, 66, 53], augmented reality [35, 50] and au-tonomous driving [32, 58]. Most traditional methods rely on depth data for this task [13, 36, 14, 63, 54], while monocu-lar methods lagged considerably behind [10, 12]. Nonethe-less, with the advent of deep learning and especially the rise of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), accuracy and robustness of monocular 6D object pose estimation have been consistently improving, even at times surpassing meth-ods relying on depth data [22, 42, 18].
Different strategies for predicting 6D pose from monoc-ACNN
RGB 2D-3D Corr. 3D Model
A
Patch-P𝑛P 6D Pose
Surface Regions
Figure 1: Illustration of GDR-Net. We directly regress the 6D object pose from a single RGB using a CNN and the learnable Patch-PnP by leveraging the guidance of interme-diate geometric features including 2D-3D dense correspon-dences and surface region attention. ular data have been proposed. For instance, learning of an embedding space for pose [49] or direct regression of the 3D rotation and translation [31]. While these meth-ods generally perform well, they usually lack in accuracy when compared with approaches that instead rely on estab-lishing 2D-3D correspondences prior to estimating the 6D pose [28, 15].
Differently, this latter class of methods usually involves solving the 6D pose through a variant of the PnP/RANSAC algorithm. While such a paradigm provides good estimates, it also suffers from several drawbacks. First, these methods are usually trained with a surrogate objective for correspon-dence regression, which does not necessarily reﬂect the ac-tual 6D pose error after optimization. In practice, two sets of correspondences can have the same average error while describing completely different poses. Second, these ap-proaches are not differentiable with respect to the estimated 6D pose, which limits learning. For instance, these meth-16611
ods cannot be coupled with self-supervised learning from unlabeled real data [55, 34, 1], as they require the computa-tion of the pose to be fully differentiable in order to obtain a signal between data and pose. Finally, the RANSAC itera-tive process can be very time-consuming when dealing with dense correspondences.
To summarize, while methods grounded on 2D-3D cor-respondences are dominating the ﬁeld, they still exhibit downsides due to the decoupling of the problem into two separate steps one of which not differentiable. Conse-quently, some efforts have been devoted to enabling back-propagation through the PnP/RANSAC stage. However, this either requires a complex training strategy in order to have good initialization of scene coordinates [4, 6, 7], or can only handle sparse correspondences of a predeﬁned set of keypoints [8]. Recently, the authors of [19] proposed to leverage PointNet [41] in order to approximate PnP for sparse correspondences. While this proves to work well,
PointNet disregards the fact that the correspondences are organized with respect to the image pixels, which tends to strongly deteriorate the performance as shown in [30].
In this work, we propose to overcome these limitations by establishing 2D-3D correspondences whilst computing the ﬁnal 6D pose estimate in a fully differentiable way (Fig. 1).
In its core, we propose to learn the PnP opti-mization, exploiting the fact that the correspondences are organized in image space, which gives a signiﬁcant boost in performance, outperforming all prior works. To summarize, we make the following contributions:
• We revisit the key ingredients in direct 6D pose regres-sion and observe that by choosing appropriate repre-sentations for the pose parameters, methods based on direct regression show competitive performance com-pared with state-of-the-art correspondence-based indi-rect methods.
• We further propose a simple yet effective Geometry-guided Direct Regression Network (GDR-Net) to boost the performance of direct 6D pose regression via leveraging the geometric guidance from dense correspondence-based intermediate representations.
Extensive experiments on LM [13], LM-O [3], and YCB-V [60] datasets show that our uniﬁed GDR-Net approach achieves accurate, yet real-time and robust, monocular 6D object pose estimation. 2.