Abstract 1.

Introduction
Localization Quality Estimation (LQE) is crucial and popular in the recent advancement of dense object detec-tors since it can provide accurate ranking scores that beneﬁt the Non-Maximum Suppression processing and improve de-tection performance. As a common practice, most existing methods predict LQE scores through vanilla convolutional features shared with object classiﬁcation or bounding box regression. In this paper, we explore a completely novel and different perspective to perform LQE – based on the learned distributions of the four parameters of the bounding box.
The bounding box distributions are inspired and introduced as “General Distribution” in GFLV1, which describes the uncertainty of the predicted bounding boxes well. Such a property makes the distribution statistics of a bounding box highly correlated to its real localization quality. Speciﬁ-cally, a bounding box distribution with a sharp peak usually corresponds to high localization quality, and vice versa. By leveraging the close correlation between distribution statis-tics and the real localization quality, we develop a consid-erably lightweight Distribution-Guided Quality Predictor (DGQP) for reliable LQE based on GFLV1, thus producing
GFLV2. To our best knowledge, it is the ﬁrst attempt in ob-ject detection to use a highly relevant, statistical represen-tation to facilitate LQE. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. Notably, GFLV2 (ResNet-101) achieves 46.2 AP at 14.6 FPS, surpassing the previous state-of-the-art ATSS baseline (43.6 AP at 14.6 FPS) by ab-solute 2.6 AP on COCO test-dev, without sacriﬁcing the efﬁciency both in training and inference.
∗Corresponding author. Xiang Li, Jun Li and Jian Yang are from PCA
Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional
Information of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and
Video Understanding for Social Security, School of Computer Science and
Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology. Xiang Li is also a visiting scholar at Momenta.
Dense object detector [28, 23, 42, 33, 18, 27] which di-rectly predicts pixel-level object categories and bounding boxes over feature maps, becomes increasingly popular due to its elegant and effective framework. One of the cru-cial techniques underlying this framework is Localization
Quality Estimation (LQE). With the help of better LQE, high-quality bounding boxes tend to score higher than low-quality ones, greatly reducing the risk of mistaken suppres-sion in Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) processing.
Many previous works [28, 29, 30, 33, 40, 36, 14, 18, 39, 43, 27] have explored LQE. For example, the YOLO family
[28, 29, 30] ﬁrst adopt Objectness to describe the localiza-tion quality, which is deﬁned as the Intersection-over-Union (IoU) between the predicted and ground-truth box. After that, IoU is further explored and proved to be effective in
IoU-Net [13], IoU-aware [36], PAA [14], GFLV1 [18] and
VFNet [39]. Recently, FCOS [33] and ATSS [40] intro-duce Centerness, the distance degree to the object center, to suppress low-quality detection results. Generally, the afore-mentioned methods share a common characteristic that they are all based on vanilla convolutional features, e.g., features of points, borders or regions (see Fig. 2 (a)-(g)), to estimate the localization quality.
Different from previous works, in this paper, we explore a brand new perspective to conduct LQE – by directly uti-lizing the statistics of bounding box distributions, instead of using the vanilla convolutional features (see Fig. 2).
Here the bounding box distribution is introduced as “Gen-eral Distribution” in GFLV1 [18], where it learns a discrete probability distribution of each predicted edge (Fig. 1 (a)) for describing the uncertainty of bounding box regression.
Interestingly, we observe that the statistic of the General
Distribution has a strong correlation with its real localiza-tion quality, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (b). More speciﬁcally in Fig. 1 (c) and (d), the shape (ﬂatness) of bounding box distribution can clearly reﬂect the localization quality of the 11632
Importantly, it brings negligible addi-tion performance. tional computation cost in practice and almost does not af-fect the training/inference speed of the basic object detec-tors. In this paper, we term this lightweight sub-network as Distribution-Guided Quality Predictor (DGQP), since it relies on the guidance of distribution statistics for quality predictions.
By introducing the lightweight DGQP that predicts re-liable LQE scores via statistics of bounding box distribu-tions, we develop a novel dense object detector based on the framework of GFLV1, thus termed GFLV2. To verify the effectiveness of GFLV2, we conduct extensive experiments on the challenging benchmark COCO [22]. Notably, based on ResNet-101 [11], GFLV2 achieves impressive detection performance (46.2 AP), i.e., 2.6 AP gains over the state-of-the-art ATSS baseline (43.6 AP) on COCO test-dev, under the same training schedule and without sacriﬁcing the efﬁciency both in training and inference.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:
• To our best knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst to bridge the statistics of bounding box distributions and localization quality estimation in an end-to-end dense object detection framework.
• The proposed GFLV2 is considerably lightweight and cost-free in practice. It can also be easily plugged into most dense object detectors with a consistent gain of ∼2 AP, and without loss of training/inference speed.
• Our GFLV2 (Res2Net-101-DCN) achieves very com-petitive 53.3 AP (multi-scale testing) on COCO dataset among dense object detectors. 2.