Abstract
#16
#37
#56
Siamese network based trackers formulate the visual tracking task as a similarity matching problem. Almost all popular Siamese trackers realize the similarity learning via convolutional feature cross-correlation between a tar-get branch and a search branch. However, since the size of target feature region needs to be pre-ﬁxed, these cross-correlation base methods suffer from either reserving much adverse background information or missing a great deal of foreground information. Moreover, the global matching be-tween the target and search region also largely neglects the target structure and part-level information.
In this paper, to solve the above issues, we propose a simple target-aware Siamese graph attention network for general object tracking. We propose to establish part-to-part correspondence between the target and the search re-gion with a complete bipartite graph, and apply the graph attention mechanism to propagate target information from the template feature to the search feature. Further, instead of using the pre-ﬁxed region cropping for template-feature-area selection, we investigate a target-aware area selection mechanism to ﬁt the size and aspect ratio variations of dif-ferent objects. Experiments on challenging benchmarks in-cluding GOT-10k, UAV123, OTB-100 and LaSOT demon-strate that the proposed SiamGAT outperforms many state-of-the-art trackers and achieves leading performance. Code is available at: https: // git. io/ SiamGAT 1.

Introduction
General object tracking is a fundamental but challeng-ing task in computer vision. In recent years, mainstream trackers focus on Siamese network based architectures
[10, 15, 16, 33], which achieve state-of-the-art performance as well as a good balance between tracking accuracy and efﬁciency. These trackers ﬁrst employ a Siamese network for feature extraction. Then they develop a tracking-head
#16
#68
#91
#63
#73
#92
SiamGAT
SiamCAR
ATOM
SiamRPN++
Figure 1 – Comparisons of our SiamGAT with state-of-the-art trackers on three challenging sequences from GOT-10k. Ben-eﬁting from the effective target information propagating, our
SiamGAT successsfully handles the challenges such as shape de-formation, similar distractors and extreme aspect-ratio changes.
Compared with the baseline SiamCAR (green), our SiamGAT (red) remarkably improves the tracking accuracy (zoom in for a better view). network for object information decoding from one or more similarity maps (or so-called response maps) obtained by information embedding between the template-branch and the search-branch. How to embed the information of the two branches to obtain informative response maps is a key issue, since information passed from the template to the search region is critical to the accurate localization of the object. Almost all current state-of-the-art Siamese trackers like SiamRPN [16], SiamRPN++ [15], SiamFC++ [33] and
SiamCAR [10] utilize a cross-correlation based layer for information embedding, which takes convolution on deep features as the basic operation. Despite their great success, some important drawbacks exist with such cross-correlation based trackers: 1) The size of convolution kernel is pre-ﬁxed. As shown in Figure 2, a common processing is crop-9543
CNN
CNN
Figure 2 – Illustration of traditional cross-correlation based sim-ilarity learning methods. The target is marked by red boxes. The
CNN features of the target, the background and the search region correspond to green, white and blue cycles respectively. An impor-tant problem is that the template feature obtained by ﬁxed-region cropping (labeled by the yellow box) may introduce much back-ground information or miss a great deal of foreground informa-tion, especially when the aspect ratio of the target changes dras-tically. Moreover, during tracking, the target shape and pose are constantly changing, but the global matching fails to consider the invariant part-level information and the transforming body shape. ping the central m × m region on the template feature map to generate the target feature, which is treated as the con-volution kernel. However, when solving tracking tasks with different object scales or aspect ratios, this pre-ﬁxed fea-ture region may suffer from either reserving lots of back-ground information or missing a great deal of foreground information, which consequently leads to inaccurate infor-mation embedding. 2) The target feature is treated as a whole for similarity computation with the search region.
However, during tracking the target often yields large ro-tation, pose variation and heavy occlusions, and performing such a global matching with variable target is not robust. 3) Because of 2), the information embedding between the template and search region is a global information propa-gating process, in which the information transmitted from the template to the search region is limited and the infor-mation compression is excessive. Our key observations are as follows: 1) The information embedding should be target-aware, that is, adaptive to the size and aspect ratio varia-tions of targets during tracking. 2) The information embed-ding should be performed by learning the part-level rela-tions (instead of global matching), as part features tend to be invariant against shape and pose variations, thus being more robust.
Aiming at solving these issues, we leverage graph atten-tion networks [28, 34] to design an part-to-part informa-tion embedding network for object tracking. We demon-strate that the information embedding between template and search region can be modeled with a complete bipartite graph, which encodes the relations between template nodes and search nodes by applying a graph attention mechanism
[28]. With learned attentive scores, each search node can effectively aggregate target information from the template.
All search nodes then yield a response map with rich in-formation for the subsequent decoding task. With such de-signs, we propose a graph attention module (GAM) to re-alize part-to-part information propagating instead of global information propagating between the template and search region. Instead of using the whole template as a convolu-tion kernel, this part-to-part similarity matching can greatly alleviate the effect of shape-and-pose variations of targets.
Further, instead of using the pre-ﬁxed region cropping, we investigate a target-aware template computing mechanism to ﬁt the size and aspect-ratio variations of different ob-jects. With the introduced GAM that enables the target-aware strategy for information embedding, we present a novel tracking framework, termed Siamese Graph Attention
Tracking (SiamGAT) network, for general object tracking.
Since this work mainly argues that an effective infor-mation embedding algorithm can enhance the performance of the tracking head, the proposed SiamGAT simply con-sists of three essential blocks, without using any feature fu-sion, data enhancement or other strategies to enhance the performance. We evaluate our SiamGAT on several chal-lenge benchmarks, including GOT-10k [14], OTB-100 [31],
UAV123 [21] and LaSOT [7]. Without bells and whistles, the proposed tracker achieves leading performance com-pared with state-of-the-art trackers. Our main contributions are as follows.
• We propose a graph attention module (GAM) to real-ize part-to-part matching for information embedding.
Compared with the traditional cross-correlation based approaches, the proposed GAM can greatly eliminate their drawbacks and effectively pass target information from template to search region.
• We propose a target-aware Siamese Graph Attention
Tracking (SiamGAT) network with GAM for general object tracking. The framework is simple yet effective.
Compared with previous works using pre-ﬁxed global feature matching, the proposed model is adaptive to the size and aspect-ratio variations of different objects.
• Experiments on multiple challenging benchmarks in-cluding GOT-10k, UAV123, OTB-100 and LaSOT demonstrate that the proposed SiamGAT outperforms many state-of-the-art trackers and achieves leading performance. 9544
2.