Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel graph convolutional network architecture, Graph Stacked Hourglass Networks, for 2D-to-3D human pose estimation tasks. The proposed architecture consists of repeated encoder-decoder, in which graph-structured features are processed across three differ-ent scales of human skeletal representations. This multi-scale architecture enables the model to learn both local and global feature representations, which are critical for 3D human pose estimation. We also introduce a multi-level feature learning approach using different-depth intermedi-ate features and show the performance improvements that result from exploiting multi-scale, multi-level feature repre-sentations. Extensive experiments are conducted to validate our approach, and the results show that our model outper-forms the state-of-the-art. 1.

Introduction
In recent years, with the application of deep learning methods, the performance of 2D human pose estimation has been greatly improved. Recent works show that using such detected 2D joints positions, the 3D human pose can also be efﬁciently and accurately regressed [27]. Due to the graph structure formed by the topology of the human skele-ton, many attempts have been made to use the generalized form of CNN: Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN), to perform the regression task of 2D-to-3D human pose esti-mation [48, 7, 23]. Since the graph convolution has a good feature extraction capability for the graph-structured data, the GCN-based approaches work well and some of them achieve the state-of-the-art results in the 2D-to-3D human pose estimation task.
However, the existing GCN-based approaches have the following limitations: First, the graph convolutions exploit all node information, which can be seen as that all features are processed at only “one scale”. Thus it is difﬁcult to extract features that can represent spatial local and global information and limits the representation capabilities. Sec-ond, most existing approaches use a straightforward archi-tecture of sequentially connecting the graph convolution layers (Fig. 4 (Top)). Such a model architecture does not take advantage of the beneﬁts of model depth, such as in-termediate features at each depth, and therefore limits its performance.
The core issue mentioned above is that the features ex-tracted by existing architecture are oversimple, which lim-its the expressiveness of the model. Features with greater representation capabilities, such as multi-scale and multi-level features, are commonly used in image-related tasks.
For multi-scale features, they denote the information from small to large resolutions of the image features, thus bring-ing rich image understanding from local to global [5, 22], while multi-level features denote the latent representations in different depths of the latent space, bringing important semantic information at all levels from shallow to deep. The introduction of the above multi-scale and multi-level fea-tures can enrich the performance of the model. However, because the upsampling and downsampling operations re-quired for multi-scale features are deﬁned on the image, and the graph has an irregular structure, such methods cannot be directly applied to the graph-structured data.
To address these issues, we propose a novel architec-ture for 2D-to-3D human pose estimation: Graph Stacked
Hourglass Networks. Speciﬁcally, we do not focus on spe-ciﬁc graph convolution operations, but rather consider how to integrate them in the architecture which gives the best performance improvement. Given the advantages of the 2D human pose estimation approaches, proposed architec-ture adopts the repeated encoder-decoder applicable to the graph-structured data for multi-scale feature extraction, as well as the intermediate features at each depth of the model for multi-level feature extraction. Such multi-scale and multi-level feature information makes the model more ex-pressive and enables the model to achieve high-precision 3D human pose estimation.
Our work makes the following contributions. First, we propose Graph Hourglass modules suitable for extracting multi-scale human skeletal features, which includes novel pooling and unpooling operations considering human skele-tal structure, called Skeletal Pool and Skeletal Unpool. 16105
9 8 7 0 13 14 15 1 2 3 0.	Pelvis 1.	R.	Hip 2.	R.	Knee 3.	R.	Ankle 4.	L.	Hip 5.	L.	Knee 6.	L.	Ankle 7.	Thorax 8.	Neck 9.	Head 10.	L.	Shoulder 11.	L.	Elbow 12.	L.	Wrist 13.	R.	Shoulder 14.	R.	Elbow 15.	R.	Wrist 10 11 12 4 5 6 (a)
High	(16	joints)
Mid	(8	joints)
Low	(4	joints) a t e e t a c i d u p li c d u p l
Skeletal	Pool
Skeletal	Pool (b)
Skeletal	Unpool (c)
Figure 1. Description of the skeletal structure of the human body. (a) The human skeletal graph structure consisting of 16 joints used in this paper. (b) Illustration of Skeletal Pool. A pair of joints composed of the same color, mapped by the max pooling operation to corresponding joints in lower scale skeletal structure. Here we deﬁne three different scales of skeletal structures, containing 16, 8, and 4 joints, respectively. (c) Illustration of Skeletal Unpool. When reverting to a higher scale skeletal structure, we duplicate the features of the lower scale joints and assign them to the two corresponding joints in the higher scale skeletal structure.
Second, we introduce Graph Stacked Hourglass Networks (GraphSH) consisting of the proposed Graph Hourglass module , which incorporates multi-level feature represen-tations at various depths of the architecture. Our architec-ture incorporates multi-scale, multi-level features and a pri-ori knowledge of the human skeleton, achieving impressive performance improvement for 2D-to-3D human pose esti-mation tasks. 2.