Abstract
We propose a novel guided interactive segmentation (GIS) algorithm for video objects to improve the segmen-tation accuracy and reduce the interaction time. First, we design the reliability-based attention module to an-alyze the reliability of multiple annotated frames. Sec-ond, we develop the intersection-aware propagation module to propagate segmentation results to neighboring frames.
Third, we introduce the GIS mechanism for a user to se-lect unsatisfactory frames quickly with less effort. Exper-imental results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm provides more accurate segmentation results at a faster speed than conventional algorithms. Codes are available at https://github.com/yuk6heo/GIS-RAmap. 1.

Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) is a task to cut out ob-jects of interest in a video. It is useful in various applica-tions such as video editing, video summarization, video in-painting, and self-driving cars. VOS is challenging since it should deal with multiple objects, object deformation, and object occlusion. Because of this difﬁculty, semi-supervised VOS, which uses a fully annotated segmentation mask in the ﬁrst frame, has been widely researched. This approach can improve the segmentation performance but re-quires a lot of time and effort for annotations (e.g. around 79 seconds per instance [4]). Also, it does not have a fallback mechanism when unsatisfactory results are obtained.
Interactive VOS adopts user-friendly annotations, e.g. scribbles, which are simple enough to provide repeatedly.
Figure 1 shows the round-based interactive VOS process.
First, a user selects a target frame and draws scribble an-notations on it. After extracting query object information from the scribbles, the algorithm obtains segmentation re-sults for all frames. Second, the user ﬁnds a frame with un-satisfactory results and then provides additional scribbles.
The algorithm then exploits both sets of scribbles to reﬁne the VOS results. This is repeated until the user is satisﬁed. o e d i
V d n u o r t s 1 d n u o r d n 2
Provide annotations
Inspect results
Execute VOS
Figure 1: Illustration of the round-based interactive VOS.
The proposed algorithm greatly reduces the inspection time, by guiding users to select a frame for annotations efﬁciently and effectively. It is recommended to watch the supplemen-tary video with a real-time demo of the proposed guided interactive system.
Recently, an automatic simulation scheme of the round-based interactive VOS was designed in [4]. However, the simulation is signiﬁcantly different from real applications in that it immediately determines segmentation results to cor-rect, by comparing them with the ground-truth. In contrast, a real user should spend considerable time to inspect the results and select poorly segmented regions. Since conven-tional interactive VOS algorithms [7, 20, 22, 24] have been developed based on the simulation in [4], they do not con-sider the time for ﬁnding unsatisfactory results in practice.
In contrast, we propose a guided interactive segmentation (GIS) algorithm for video objects, which guides users to
ﬁnd poorly segmented regions quickly and effectively.
Moreover, although interactive VOS can use the infor-mation in N annotated frames in the N th round, the con-ventional algorithms [7, 20] do not exploit those multiple annotated frames thoroughly. Heo et al. [7] simply aver-age the features from multiple annotated frames. Miao et al. [20] use only the best matching result between a target frame and multiple annotated frames. On the contrary, we analyze the reliability of each annotated frame to reﬁne seg-mentation results in a target frame more accurately. 7322
In this paper, we propose the GIS algorithm using reliability-based attention (R-attention) maps. First, we transfer query object information from annotated frames to a target frame using R-attention maps, which represent pixel-wise reliability of the annotated frames. Next, we per-form intersection-aware propagation to propagate segmen-tation results to neighboring frames sequentially. Third, we compute a guidance score, called R-score, to reduce or re-move the processing time for selecting the frame to be an-notated in each round. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed GIS algorithm outperforms recent state-of-the-arts in both the interactive VOS simulation in [4] and real-world applications.
This paper has three main contributions: 1. Two novel operators to exploit multiple annotations and neighboring results are developed for VOS: R-attention and intersection-aware propagation modules. 2. We propose the notion of guidance in interactive VOS. 3. The proposed GIS algorithm outperforms the state-of-the-arts signiﬁcantly in both speed and accuracy. 2.