Abstract
A novel algorithm to detect an optimal set of seman-tic lines is proposed in this work. We develop two net-works: selection network (S-Net) and harmonization net-work (H-Net). First, S-Net computes the probabilities and offsets of line candidates. Second, we ﬁlter out irrelevant lines through a selection-and-removal process. Third, we construct a complete graph, whose edge weights are com-puted by H-Net. Finally, we determine a maximal weight clique representing an optimal set of semantic lines. More-over, to assess the overall harmony of detected lines, we propose a novel metric, called HIoU. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm can detect harmo-nious semantic lines effectively and efﬁciently. Our codes are available at https://github.com/dongkwonjin/Semantic-Line-MWCS. 1.

Introduction
A semantic line [16, 19] is deﬁned as a meaningful line, separating different semantic regions in a scene, which is approximated by an end-to-end straight line. A group of semantic lines in an image can be regarded as optimal, when they convey the composition of the image harmoniously, as shown in Figure 1(e). Thus, in an optimal set, the lines should harmonize with one another.
Semantic lines provide important visual cues in high-level image understanding [7,9,12,18,20,21,36]. In photog-raphy, semantic lines, such as horizontal, vertical, and sym-metric ones, are essential composition components. Har-mony of such lines are closely related to subjective quality of a photograph [7, 18, 20].
In autonomous driving sys-tems [9, 12, 13], boundaries of road lanes and sidewalks should be detected reliably to control vehicle maneuvers, which can be also described by semantic lines. Moreover, dominant parallel lines intersect at vanishing points [21,36] under perspective projection, conveying depth impression.
They are also semantic lines [16]. However, it is challeng-ing to detect semantic lines, which are often unobvious and implied by complex boundaries of semantic regions. (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
Figure 1: In each scene, straight lines approximating region boundaries are shown in (a). Among them, three subsets of lines are shown in (b), (c), and (d), which are insufﬁcient, over-segmenting, and sub-optimal for describing the com-position of the scene, respectively. In contrast, an optimal set of semantic lines in (e) convey the composition of the scene harmoniously.
Many techniques have been developed to detect line segments in a scene by exploiting hand-crafted features
[1, 4, 23, 28] or deep features [15, 22, 31, 37]. However, they may extract redundant short line segments or focus on identifying obvious line structures in man-made envi-ronments. Recently, several attempts have been made to de-tect semantic lines [10, 16, 19, 29, 32]. Horizon lines, which are a speciﬁc type of semantic lines, have been estimated by CNN-based methods [29, 32]. In [10, 16, 19], semantic line detectors have been proposed. They have two stages: line detection and reﬁnement. In the detection stage, deep line features are extracted to classify line candidates, but implied lines may be undetected or the computational cost for extracting discriminative features can be too high. In the reﬁnement stage, redundant lines are removed through non-maximum suppression (NMS) or pairwise comparison.
Although these techniques provide promising results, they may fail to consider the harmony between detected lines and thus may yield sub-optimal results, as shown in Figure 1(d).
In this paper, a novel algorithm to detect an optimal set 16737
S-Net
Hough space iterations (cid:1837)
Image line candidates
Selected lines (a) Line probability and offset computation (cid:1840) (cid:1842) (b) Selection and removal
Selected lines
H-Net
Line pair
×
+
⋯
⋯
MWCS
⋯
⋯ (c) Edge weight estimation (d) Finding maximal weight clique
Figure 2: Overview of the proposed algorithm.
Semantic lines of harmonious semantic lines is proposed based on maxi-mal weight clique selection (MWCS). We formulate the de-tection as ﬁnding a maximal weight clique in a complete graph [3, 8]. To this end, we design two networks: selec-tion network (S-Net) and harmonization network (H-Net).
Given an image and a set of line candidates, S-Net ﬁrst computes the classiﬁcation probability and regression off-sets of each candidate. Second, we ﬁlter out irrelevant lines by performing a selection-and-removal process. Third, we construct a complete graph, in which the node set contains the selected lines. H-Net computes its edge weights. Fi-nally, we determine a maximal weight clique representing harmonious semantic lines. Experimental results demon-strate that the proposed algorithm can detect harmonious semantic lines accurately and efﬁciently.
This work has the following major contributions:
• We formulate the semantic line detection as ﬁnding an maximal weight clique in a complete graph.
• We develop two networks, S-Net and H-Net, to con-struct the complete graph.
• We introduce a novel metric, called HIoU, to assess the overall harmony of semantic lines, which is more reasonable than the existing metrics in [10, 19].
• The proposed algorithm yields competitive semantic line detection performance to the state-of-the-art DRM technique [16], while reducing the computational com-plexity by a factor of 1 20 . 2.