Abstract
This paper proposes a novel heterogeneous grid convolu-tion that builds a graph-based image representation by ex-ploiting heterogeneity in the image content, enabling adap-tive, efﬁcient, and controllable computations in a convolu-tional architecture. More concretely, the approach builds a data-adaptive graph structure from a convolutional layer by a differentiable clustering method, pools features to the graph, performs a novel direction-aware graph convolu-tion, and unpool features back to the convolutional layer.
By using the developed module, the paper proposes het-erogeneous grid convolutional networks, highly efﬁcient yet strong extension of existing architectures. We have evalu-ated the proposed approach on four image understanding tasks, semantic segmentation, object localization, road ex-traction, and salient object detection. The proposed method is effective on three of the four tasks. Especially, the method outperforms a strong baseline with more than 90% reduc-tion in ﬂoating-point operations for semantic segmentation, and achieves the state-of-the-art result for road extraction.
We will share our code, model, and data. 1.

Introduction
Our world is heterogeneous in nature. Looking at a scene from a car (See Fig. 1), the road occupies one third of the image with homogeneous textures. At the far end of the road are full of objects such as cars, pedestrians, or road signs. The density of semantic information varies per lo-cation. Our attention to the world is also heterogeneous in nature. With a speciﬁc task in mind, we focus our attention to a speciﬁc portion of an image, for example, tracing a road network in a satellite image.
While a regular grid feature representation has been suc-cessful, such a representation contains redundant informa-tion in low density regions, whereas the spatial resolution is insufﬁcient in high density regions. Features should be stored adaptively based on the information density.
This paper studies a novel “heterogeneous grid convolu-tion”, which has the following three advantages. (Adaptive)
The node features are adaptively allocated where necessary. (Efﬁcient) The adaptive allocation reduces redundant com-putations. (Controllable) An agent can focus computation to a region of interest with an additional input.
There are two technical challenges in learning such a
ﬂexible feature representation: (a) how to adaptively allo-cate nodes while exploiting image heterogeneity, and (b) how to deﬁne a convolution operation on a heterogeneous grid structure. We propose a differentiable clustering-based graph pooling for the ﬁrst challenge and a direction-aware extension of the graph convolution for the second challenge.
The combination of our graph pooling and direction-aware graph convolution forms a neural model, dubbed 113946
heterogeneous grid convolution, that can be inserted into any existing CNN architecture. By exploiting the proposed module, we also propose a heterogeneous grid convolu-tional neural networks (HG-CNNs) as a highly efﬁcient yet strong extension of existing CNN architectures.
We have evaluated the proposed approach on four im-age understanding tasks, semantic segmentation, object lo-calization, road extraction, and salient object detection.
The proposed HG-CNNs are effective for three of the four tasks; the HG-CNN outperforms strong baselines with fewer ﬂoating-point operations (more than 90% reduction) on semantic segmentation; it achieves the state-of-the-art result on road extraction task; it yields compelling perfor-mance against state-of-the-arts on salient object detection.
The current neural processors (i.e., NPU and GPU) are op-timized for regular grid computations, and the proposed module is not necessarily computationally faster or more efﬁcient in practice. However, the paper opens up a new avenue of research, potentially leading to an impact in ver-tical application domains, such as embedded devices with specialized hardware. We will share all our code and data to promote further research. 2.