Abstract
Fovea, located in the centre of the retina, is specialized for high-acuity vision. Mimicking the sampling mechanism of the fovea, a retina-inspired camera, named spiking cam-era, is developed to record the external information with a sampling rate of 40,000 Hz, and outputs asynchronous bi-nary spike streams. Although the temporal resolution of vi-sual information is improved, how to reconstruct the scenes is still a challenging problem. In this paper, we present a novel high-speed image reconstruction model through the short-term plasticity (STP) mechanism of the brain. We de-rive the relationship between postsynaptic potential regu-lated by STP and the ﬁring frequency of each pixel. By set-ting up the STP model at each pixel of the spiking camera, we can infer the scene radiance with the temporal regular-ity of the spike stream. Moreover, we show that STP can be used to distinguish the static and motion areas and fur-ther enhance the reconstruction results. The experimental results show that our methods achieve state-of-the-art per-formance in both image quality and computing time.
Figure 1. Illustration of working mechanism for traditional cam-eras, event cameras, and spiking cameras. Traditional cameras acquire images according to the constant frame rate, event cam-eras generate asynchronous events for all pixels when brightness changes exceed a certain threshold, and spiking cameras continu-ously capture photons and generate asynchronous spike for all pix-els when the accumulated intensity reaches a predeﬁned threshold. 1.

Introduction
High-speed imaging is desired in scientiﬁc imaging and professional photography for clearly recording fast-changing processes in physics experiments, rapidly moving particles in chemical reactions, ﬂeeting moment in com-petitive sports and so on. The traditional digital camera records scenes with a constant shutter speed (e.g., 30 fps), which loses much visual information and suffers motion blur. High-speed cameras can output images with a rela-tively high time sampling frequency of millions Hz or even hundreds of millions Hz [1, 13]. However, enormous mem-ory demands are needed to record these images. More-over, high-speed cameras require specialized sensors that
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
* Corresponding authors: yuzf12@pku.edu.cn. are highly expensive, which cannot be widely used.
Over the past decades, neuromorphic vision sensors [12] have attracted extensive attention with its bio-inspired vi-sual recording mechanism. Unlike conventional cameras, which sample external light with the same exposure time for all pixels, the neuromorphic vision sensors mimick the retina’s sampling process and generate asynchronously bi-nary outputs for all pixels based on the scene radiance change. A commonly used neuromorphic vision sensors are dynamic vision sensors (DVS) (also called event cameras), in which events are generated only when the brightness change exceeds a certain threshold [22, 5, 9]. Event cameras have distinctive advantages over traditional frame cameras such as low-latency, sparse output, low power consumption, and high dynamic range. Despite this, it is difﬁcult for an event camera to reconstruct textures in scenes as visual in-16358
formation of the static scenes is lost. Inspired by the sam-pling mechanism of primate fovea located in the retina cen-ter [34, 18], another retina-inspired camera named spiking camera has been developed in recent years [6, 7]. Each pixel of the spiking camera continuously captures photons and generates a spike when the accumulated intensity reaches a predeﬁned threshold. An intuitive illustration for traditional cameras, event cameras, and spiking cameras is shown in
Fig. 1. In spiking cameras, the pixels sensed different scene radiance will ﬁre spikes with varying frequencies — the stronger the radiance is, the faster the spikes ﬁre. Compared with event cameras, the spiking camera retains high-speed spatio-temporal information for both moving and static ob-jects, which is ready-to-use for scene reconstruction.
Recently, some scene reconstruction methods have been proposed by estimating the ﬁring frequency of each pixel, as the photosensitive units receive different scene radiance will trigger spikes with different frequencies [38, 39, 36].
However, these methods require a predeﬁned length of the time window, which often suffer the problems of motion blur and low image contrast if the window length is inap-propriate. Besides, complex optimization algorithms are utilized to separate the motion and static areas as to make it impossible to reconstruct images in real-time. Therefore, how to estimate each pixel’s ﬁring frequency without a pre-deﬁned time window and reconstruct the texture with high image quality and low latency is still unclear.
In this paper, we develop a new high-speed image recon-struction approach through the short-term plasticity (STP) mechanism of the brain [31, 30]. By employing the out-put spiking streams as the input of spiking neural networks with STP [17], we derive the relationship between the time-varying ﬁring frequency of each pixel and the dynamics of the postsynaptic neuron, and further infer the scene radiance and the pixel value of the reconstructed images. Moreover, as the dynamics of STP model will ﬂuctuate around a stable value if the spike frequency changes, we introduce a mo-tion extraction method with STP to enhance the reconstruc-tion results. The experimental results show that the pro-posed methods are capable to reconstruct high-speed mo-tion scenes with high quality in real-time, the performance of which outperform state-of-the-art approaches.
Contributions:
• We propose bio-inspired image reconstruction meth-ods by implicitly estimating each pixel’s ﬁring fre-quency rather than utilizing time windows.
• We propose a novel motion extraction method based on the STP dynamics intuitively, without using much extra computation while rebuilding scenes.
• The proposed methods outperform previous works in both image quality and computing time, which lever-age spiking cameras’ low latency to realize high-speed image reconstruction. 2.