Abstract
Single-shot monocular birefractive stereo methods have been used for estimating sparse depth from double refrac-tion over edges. They also obtain an ordinary-ray (o-ray) image concurrently or subsequently through additional post-processing of depth densiﬁcation and deconvolution.
However, when an extraordinary-ray (e-ray) image is re-stored to acquire stereo images, the existing methods suffer from very severe restoration artifacts due to a low signal-to-noise ratio of input e-ray image or depth/deconvolution er-rors. In this work, we present a novel stereo image restora-tion network that can restore stereo images directly from a double-refraction image. First, we built a physically faithful birefractive stereo imaging dataset by simulating the dou-ble refraction phenomenon with existing RGB-D datasets.
Second, we formulated a joint stereo restoration problem that accounts for not only geometric relation between o-/e-ray images but also joint optimization of restoring both stereo images. We trained our model with our birefrac-tive image dataset in an end-to-end manner. Our model restores high-quality stereo images directly from double re-fraction in real-time, enabling high-quality stereo video us-ing a monocular camera. Our method also allows us to esti-mate dense depth maps from stereo images using a conven-tional stereo method. We evaluate the performance of our method experimentally and synthetically with the ground truth. Results validate that our stereo image restoration network outperforms the existing methods with high accu-racy. We demonstrate several image-editing applications using our high-quality stereo images and dense depth maps. 1.

Introduction
Double refraction occurs by birefringence, an optical property of anisotropic, transmissive materials, where an incident ray is split into two rays: ordinary ray (o-ray) and extraordinary ray (e-ray). A double-refraction image is a su-perimposed image caused by the refracted o-ray and e-ray placed on the same image with displacement (see Figure 1
Figure 1: (a) an input double-refraction image, (b) an o-ray image result, (c) an e-ray result, (d) a dense disparity map estimated from our stereo images. Compared to ground truth, PSNRs and SSIMs of the entire o-/e-ray images are 40.80/36.90 dB, SSIM: 0.9854/0.9799, respectively. for an example). Displacement in a double-refraction im-age contains additional information related to depth, similar to a disparity in traditional stereo, i.e., it is inversely pro-portional to depth. Based on this phenomenon, single-shot monocular birefractive stereo methods [1, 12] have been developed to estimate sparse depth from double refraction over edges, achieving passive monocular 3D imaging with a small form factor.
To obtain two stereo images from double refraction, there are two different ways in the existing methods. One way is to densify the sparse depth map with a diffu-sion method [10] and then deconvolve the input double-refraction image with different point spread functions (PSFs) for each depth [1]. The resulting quality depends on the accuracy of per-pixel depth. Ringing artifacts of de-convolution often occur, degrading the image quality of the restored images. Another way is to subtract the restored o-ray image from the input double-refraction image and then recover its scale [12]. This approach restores an e-ray im-age from uneven double refraction. Still, the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the input e-ray image is inherently low in an uneven double refraction image [12]. Even though the re-stored o-ray image is sharp, the e-ray image suffers from 11987
severe noise, and also some restoration errors in the o-ray image are inherited from the e-ray image. Earlier birefrac-tive imaging solutions mainly focus on acquiring the depth information and the ordinary-ray image only. None of the existing works can restore stereo images from a double-refraction image with high quality yet.
Different from the existing works, we focus on stereo im-age restoration directly from double refraction without re-lying on depth information. Since double refraction and dis-placement are geometrically related, our objective is chal-lenging. Therefore, to mitigate the ill-posedness of our problem, we ﬁrst generate a physically faithful birefrac-tive stereo dataset from existing RGB-D datasets [14, 17] by simulating the double refraction phenomenon. Second, we formulate a joint stereo restoration problem that ac-counts for the geometric relation of o-ray and e-ray images to jointly infers both stereo images from double refraction with high accuracy. We train our model with our birefrac-tive image dataset with supervised signals in an end-to-end manner. Our model can restore high-quality stereo images directly from double refraction (Figure 1a) without know-ing depth information (Figures 1b and 1c). These stereo images also agree with epipolar geometry with high accu-racy, allowing us to estimate dense depth with high accuracy from the restored stereo images using a conventional stereo method [3] (Figure 1d).
Our model is computationally efﬁcient.
It takes just
∼227 ms to restore two stereo images of three megapixels from input on a conventional desktop computer with a GPU.
Using our network, a high-quality stereo video can be ob-tained directly from a double-refraction video in real-time, enabling high-quality anaglyph of 3D stereo vision using a single monocular camera.
We evaluate the performance of our method experimen-tally and synthetically with the ground truth. Results vali-date that our stereo image restoration network outperforms the existing methods with high accuracy. We demonstrate several image-editing applications using high-quality stereo images and dense depth maps. All codes and models are published to ensure reproducibility. 2.