Abstract
Model-based 3D pose and shape estimation methods re-construct a full 3D mesh for the human body by estimat-ing several parameters. However, learning the abstract pa-rameters is a highly non-linear process and suffers from image-model misalignment, leading to mediocre model per-formance.
In contrast, 3D keypoint estimation methods combine deep CNN network with the volumetric represen-tation to achieve pixel-level localization accuracy but may predict unrealistic body structure.
In this paper, we ad-dress the above issues by bridging the gap between body mesh estimation and 3D keypoint estimation. We propose a novel hybrid inverse kinematics solution (HybrIK). HybrIK directly transforms accurate 3D joints to relative body-part rotations for 3D body mesh reconstruction, via the twist-and-swing decomposition. The swing rotation is analyti-cally solved with 3D joints, and the twist rotation is derived from the visual cues through the neural network. We show that HybrIK preserves both the accuracy of 3D pose and the realistic body structure of the parametric human model, leading to a pixel-aligned 3D body mesh and a more accu-rate 3D pose than the pure 3D keypoint estimation methods.
Without bells and whistles, the proposed method surpasses the state-of-the-art methods by a large margin on various 3D human pose and shape benchmarks. As an illustrative example, HybrIK outperforms all the previous methods by 13.2 mm MPJPE and 21.9 mm PVE on 3DPW dataset. Our code is available at https://github.com/Jeff-sjtu/HybrIK. 1.

Introduction
Recovering the 3D surface from a monocular RGB im-age is a fundamentally ill-posed problem. It has a wide rage of application scenarios [52, 31, 27, 28, 8]. With the de-velopment of the parametric statistical human body shape models [2, 29, 47], a realistic and controllable 3D mesh of
†Cewu Lu is the corresponding author. He is the member of Qing
Yuan Research Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI
Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China.
Figure 1. Closing the loop between the 3D skeleton and the parametric model via HybrIK. A 3D skeleton predicted by the neural network can be transformed into a parametric body mesh by inverse kinematics without loss of accuracy. The parametric body mesh can generate structural realistic 3D skeleton by forward kinematics. human body can be generated from only a few parameters, e.g. shape parameters and relative rotations of body parts.
Recent studies develop the model-based methods [7, 18, 23] to obtain these parameters from the monocular RGB input and produce 3D pose and shape of human bodies.
Most of the model-based methods can be catego-rized into two classes: optimization-based approach and learning-based approach. Optimization-based ap-proaches [13, 7, 47] estimate the body pose and shape by an iterative ﬁtting process. The parameters of the statistical model are tuned to reduce the error between its 2D projec-tion and 2D observations, e.g. 2D joint locations and silhou-ette. However, the optimization problem is non-convex and takes a long time to solve. The results are sensitive to the initialization. These issues shift the spotlight towards the learning-based approaches. With a parametric body model, learning-based approaches use neural networks to regress the model parameters directly [18, 23, 20]. But the parame-ter space in the statistical model is abstract, making it difﬁ-cult for the networks to learn the mapping function.
This challenge prompts us to look into the ﬁeld of 3D keypoint estimation. Instead of the direct regression, previ-ous methods [48, 60] adopt volumetric heatmap as the target representation to learn 3D joint locations and have achieved 3383
impressive performance. This inspires us to build a collabo-ration between the 3D joints and the body mesh (Fig. 1). On the one hand, the accurate 3D joints facilitate the 3D body mesh estimation. On the other hand, the shape prior in para-metric body model in turn ﬁxes the unrealistic body struc-ture issue of the 3D keypoint estimation methods. Since the current 3D keypoint estimation methods lack explicit mod-elling of the distribution of body bone length, it may predict unrealistic body structures like left-right asymmetry and ab-normal proportions of limbs. By leveraging the parametric body model, the presented human shape better conforms to the actual human body.
In this work, we propose a hybrid analytical-neural in-verse kinematics solution (HybrIK) to bridge the gap be-tween 3D keypoint estimation and body mesh estimation.
Inverse kinematics (IK) process is the mathematical process of ﬁnding the relative rotations to produce the desired loca-tions of body joints. It is an ill-posed problem because there is no unique solution. The core of our approach is to pro-pose an innovative IK solution via twist-and-swing decom-position. The relative rotation of a skeleton part is decom-posed into twist and swing, i.e. a longitudinal rotation and an in-plane rotation. In HybrIK, we composite the entire rotation recursively along the kinematic tree by analytically calculating swing rotation and predicting twist rotation. A critical characteristic of our approach is that the relative ro-tation estimated by HybrIK is naturally aligned with the 3D skeleton, without the need for additional optimization pro-cedures in the previous approaches [7, 47, 23]. All oper-ations in HybrIK are differentiable, which allows us to si-multaneously train 3D joints and human body mesh in an end-to-end manner. Besides, experiments indicate that Hy-brIK raises the performance of body mesh estimation to the same level as 3D keypoint estimation and takes a step for-ward. The proposed approach is benchmarked in various 3D human pose and shape datasets, and it signiﬁcantly outper-forms state-of-the-art approaches [23, 38] by 21.9 mm PVE on 3DPW [67], 6.6 mm PA-MPJPE on Human3.6M [16] and 10.8 AUC on MPI-INF-3DHP [33].
The contributions of our approach can be summarized as follows:
• We propose HybrIK, a hybrid analytical-neural IK so-lution that converts the accurate 3D joint locations to full 3D human body mesh. HybrIK is differentiable and allows end-to-end training.
• Our approach closes the loop between the 3D skeleton and the parametric model. It ﬁxes the alignment issue of current model-based body mesh estimation methods and the unrealistic body structure problem of 3D key-point estimation methods at the same time.
• Our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance across various 3D human pose and shape benchmarks. 2.