Abstract
We address rotation averaging (RA) and its application to real-world 3D reconstruction. Local optimisation based approaches are the de facto choice, though they only guar-antee a local optimum. Global optimisers ensure global op-timality in low noise conditions, but they are inefﬁcient and may easily deviate under the inﬂuence of outliers or ele-vated noise levels. We push the envelope of rotation aver-aging by leveraging the advantages of a global RA method and a local RA method. Combined with a fast view graph
ﬁltering as preprocessing, the proposed hybrid approach is robust to outliers. We further apply the proposed hybrid rotation averaging approach to incremental Structure from
Motion (SfM), the accuracy and robustness of SfM are both improved by adding the resulting global rotations as reg-ularisers to bundle adjustment. Overall, we demonstrate high practicality of the proposed method as bad camera poses are effectively corrected and drift is reduced. 1.

Introduction
Rotation averaging is a problem that consists of estimat-ing absolute camera orientations that agree as well as pos-sible with a set of pairwise relative orientations. Errors ex-pressing disagreements between estimated absolute orienta-tions and the measured relative orientations are hereby dis-tributed over each pairwise constraint. Rotation averaging is essential in global or hierarchical Structure from Motion (SfM) [29, 15, 36, 49, 50], as well as Simultaneous Local-ization and Mapping (SLAM) [7] where it can accelerate camera pose estimation and reduce drift accumulation.
In global SfM, we typically start by constructing a view graph G that encodes all connections between pairs of views i and j by an edge (i, j), each one including the relative motion between image i and image j. Rotation averaging then gives us the absolute orientation of each view, and it is typically followed by a translation averaging step [25, 31, 21, 51] to also obtain absolute positions. Triangulation of
Figure 1. Reconstructions generated from the Trafalgar dataset [45], where 7085 out of 15685 images have been registered, and the rotation averaging step only took 4.2 s. 3D points and joint optimisation over all parameters (i.e. bundle adjustment [39]) completes the reconstruction.
In
SLAM, rotation averaging has been used in the back-end pose graph optimisation [33, 7] to ﬂexibly encounter large drift accumulations or—more generally—replace the time-consuming bundle adjustment step.
Rotation averaging was ﬁrst proposed using the quater-nion representation [22]. Later solutions can be categorised into approaches based on either local and global optimisa-tion. Local optimisation approaches such as the one pre-sented by Chatterjee and Govindu [8] are well studied and practical. However, these methods only return the near-est local minimum. To overcome this limitation, the com-munity has also proposed global optimisation approaches
[40, 33, 18, 17, 16]. Though the retrieval of global op-tima can be guaranteed, they have large computational cost and high sensitivity against outliers, and thus are impracti-cal when applied to large-scale SfM problems.
In this paper, we focus on improving the efﬁciency and robustness of the rotation averaging method, and on push-ing its application to challenging scenes. We make a com-bination of a global solver and a local solver to solve rota-tion averaging, which guarantees global optimality and has strong resilience against outliers. Rotation averaging based on chordal distances can be reformulated as a semi-deﬁnite program (SDP) with a low-rank constraint. Taking advan-tage of the low-rank factorisation of the original SDP, we 10358
can apply globally optimal Riemannian-Staircase-based [3] methods. In principle, any global solver [33, 37, 16] can be used in our hybrid approach, and we adopt the block coor-dinate minimisation method [37] to better leverage the view graph sparsity. By preprocessing the graph with fast view graph ﬁltering, graph sparsity can be further exploited to accelerate the optimisation.
Previous works mainly apply rotation averaging to global SfM. Though global SfM is efﬁcient, translation av-eraging is often complicated by the unknown scale of rela-tive translations and the difﬁculty of identifying outliers. In this work, we embed the proposed approach into an incre-mental SfM pipeline. The strategy is inspired by the work of Cui et al. [13], who proposes a hybrid SfM scheme where camera rotations are estimated globally, and camera centers are estimated incrementally by a perspective-2-point (P2P) method. Though the approach is efﬁcient, some estimated absolute rotations are not correct, thus it prevents camera centers from proper registration and scene reconstructions
Inspired by Cui’s approach [13], we from completeness. apply rotation averaging in a traditional incremental SfM pipeline, however, use the perspective-3-point (P3P) to reg-ister camera rotations and centers. We further propose a novel cost function to optimise camera poses and landmarks that alleviates drift accumulation, in which camera rotations obtained from rotation averaging are used as regularisers.
The resulting SfM approach, named RA-SfM (Rotation-Averaged Structure from Motion), shows high practicality and surpasses state-of-the-art methods in accuracy, which is demonstrated at the hand of extensive experiments on large-scale real-world datasets. The reconstruction result of the largest dataset is shown in Fig. 1.
In summary, the main contributions of our work are:
• We propose an outlier-resilient hybrid rotation averag-ing approach, which combines a global optimiser with fast view graph ﬁltering and a local optimiser.
• We reﬁne the traditional incremental bundle adjust-ment cost function by adding the obtained global ro-tations as a regularisation term, which signiﬁcantly al-leviates drift accumulation in incremental SfM.
The practicality and superiority of the proposed scheme is demonstrated by extensive experiments on synthetic datasets and challenged internet datasets. 2.