Abstract
While deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved great success on image de-raining task, most ex-isting methods can only learn ﬁxed mapping rules between paired rainy/clean images on a single dataset. This limits their applications in practical situations with multiple and incremental datasets where the mapping rules may change for different types of rain streaks. However, the catastrophic forgetting of traditional deep CNN model challenges the de-sign of generalized framework for multiple and incremental datasets. A strategy of sharing the network structure but in-dependently updating and storing the network parameters on each dataset has been developed as a potential solution.
Nevertheless, this strategy is not applicable to compact sys-tems as it dramatically increases the overall training time and parameter space. To alleviate such limitation, in this study, we propose a parameter importance guided weights modiﬁcation approach, named PIGWM. Speciﬁcally, with new dataset (e.g. new rain dataset), the well-trained net-work weights are updated according to their importance evaluated on previous training dataset. With extensive ex-perimental validation, we demonstrate that a single network with a single parameter set of our proposed method can process multiple rain datasets almost without performance degradation. The proposed model is capable of achieving superior performance on both inhomogeneous and incre-mental datasets, and is promising for highly compact sys-tems to gradually learn myriad regularities of the different types of rain streaks. The results indicate that our proposed method has great potential for other computer vision tasks with dynamic learning environments. 1.

Introduction
In recent years, remarkable progress has been achieved on single image de-raining and other low-level vision tasks due to the rapid growth of deep learning [32, 9, 5, 35, 45, 18, 50, 43, 27, 8, 44, 41, 33, 23, 13, 37, 3, 6, 30]. (a) Input (b) SI (c) PIGWM (d) Clean
Figure 1: Deraining results of PreNet [29] trained sequen-tially on task sequence Rain100H [40]-Rain100L [40] from test dataset of Rain100H. (a) Input image with rain streaks. (b) Result of the model trained sequentially and indepen-dently (SI). (c) Result of the model trained sequentially with our PIGWM. (d) The clean image. This ﬁgure presents the de-raining network sufffers from catastrophic forgetting and
PIGWM is capable of maintaining the performance on pre-vious task.
Single image rain removal aims to recover the clean im-age from its rain-polluted version, which is the basis for other downstream computer vision tasks, e.g. object detec-tion, image classiﬁcation, person identiﬁcation, and more
[20, 12, 4, 24, 19, 31, 34]. Despite increasing attentions and great improvements on image de-raining tasks, exist-ing deep CNN-based rain removal methods can only learn
ﬁxed mapping rules between paired rainy/clean images on a single type of dataset due to catastrophic forgetting prob-lem.
In addition, with sequential training on multiple datasets, current deep neural network leads to almost com-plete forgetting of former knowledge and largely degrades the model’s performance on previous tasks, after the model being trained on the new task.
Aforementioned problems limit their applications in real dynamic situations where the mapping rules do not remain the same but change according to different types of rain streaks. Although haven’t explored for de-raining task, a strategy of sharing network structure but independently updating and storing network parameters on each dataset can be adopted. However, this strategy is not suitable for compact systems design, since it dramatically increases the overall training time and parameter space. This hinders the practical implementation of de-raining algorithms on edge devices, e.g. mobile phone with limited storage.
*† Co-ﬁrst authors contributed equally, * corresponding author.
In this paper, we aim to solve the catastrophic forgetting 4907
capable of obtaining superior performance on new dataset while maintaining that on previous one. To the best of our knowledge, it is the ﬁrst attempt to solve the catastrophic forgetting problem on rain removal task.
The major contributions of this paper are as follows: 1) It is the ﬁrst attempt to deal with the catastrophic for-getting problem on image rain removal. We introduce the continual learning scheme to handle different types of rain streaks with a single model. 2) A parameter importance guided weights modiﬁcation approach, named PIGWM is proposed to overcome catastrophic forgetting for image de-raining. This may be easily extended to other computer vision tasks in a plug-and-play manner. 3) Extensive experiments on multiple type of rain streak benchmarks validate the superior performance of our proposed method. 2.