Abstract
The new trend of full-screen devices encourages us to position a camera behind a screen. Removing the bezel and centralizing the camera under the screen brings larger display-to-body ratio and enhances eye contact in video chat, but also causes image degradation. In this paper, we focus on a newly-deﬁned Under-Display Camera (UDC), as a novel real-world single image restoration problem.
First, we take a 4k Transparent OLED (T-OLED) and a phone Pentile OLED (P-OLED) and analyze their optical systems to understand the degradation. Second, we design a Monitor-Camera Imaging System (MCIS) for easier real pair data acquisition, and a model-based data synthesiz-ing pipeline to generate Point Spread Function (PSF) and
UDC data only from display pattern and camera measure-ments. Finally, we resolve the complicated degradation us-ing deconvolution-based pipeline and learning-based meth-ods. Our model demonstrates a real-time high-quality restoration. The presented methods and results reveal the promising research values and directions of UDC. 1.

Introduction
Under-display Camera (UDC) is a new imaging system that mounts display screen on top of a traditional digital camera lens, as shown in Figure 1. Such a system has mainly two advantages. First, it brings a new product trend of full-screen devices [11] with larger screen-to-body ratio, which can provide better user perceptive and intelligent ex-perience [12]. Without seeing the bezel and extra buttons, users can easily access more functions by directly touching the screen. Second, it provides better human computer in-teraction. By putting the camera in the center of the display, it enhances teleconferencing experiences with perfect gaze tracking, and it is increasingly relevant for larger display devices such as laptops and TVs.
Unlike pressure or ﬁngerprint sensors that can be eas-ily integrated into a display, it is relatively difﬁcult to re-tain full functionality of an imaging sensor after mounting it behind a display. The imaging quality of a camera will be severely degraded due to lower light transmission rate
Figure 1: The newly proposed imaging system named
Under-Display Camera (UDC). We mount display screen on top of a traditional digital camera lens. The design brings new trend of full-screen devices. and diffraction effects. As a result, images captured will be noisy and blurry. Therefore, while bringing better user experience and interaction, UDC may sacriﬁce the quality of photography, face processing [35] and other downstream vision tasks. Restoring and enhancing the images captured by UDC system will be desired.
Traditional image restoration approaches form the task as an inverse problem or an optimization problem like
Maximum-a-Posterior (MAP). For the UDC problem, for practical purposes, the proposed image restoration algo-rithm and system are expected to work in real-time. There-fore, deconvolutional-based methods like Wiener Filter [14] should be preferred. Deconvolution is the inverse process of convolution and recovers the original signal from the point-spread-function (PSF)-convolved image. The ﬁdelity of the deconvolution process is dependent on the space-invariance of the PSF over the image ﬁeld of-view (FOV) and on a low condition number for the inverse of the PSF [19].
For strongly non-delta-function-like PSFs such as those en-countered when imaging through a display, the value of con-dition number can be large. For such PSFs an additional denoising step may be essential.
Another option is the emerging discriminative learning-based image restoration model. Data-driven discrimina-tive learning-based image restoration models usually out-perform traditional methods in speciﬁc tasks like image de-noising [3, 26, 42, 43, 47, 48], de-bluring [21, 28],de-raining
[39, 40], de-hazing [13, 33], super-resolution [22, 37], and 9179
light-enhancement [9]. However, working on synthesis data with single degradation type, existing models can be hardly utilized to enhance real-world low-quality images with complicated or combined degradation types. To ad-dress complicated real degradation like the UDC prob-lem, directly collecting real paired data or synthesizing near-realistic data after fully understanding the degradation model is necessary.
In this paper, we present the ﬁrst study to deﬁne and an-alyze the novel Under-Display Camera (UDC) system from both optics and image restoration viewpoints. For optics, we parse the optical system of the UDC pipeline and ana-lyze the characteristics of light transmission. Then we re-late the obtained intuitions and measurements to an image restoration pipeline, and propose two ways of resolving the single-image restoration: A deconvolution-based Wiener
Filter [29] pipeline (DeP) and a data-driven learning-based approach. Speciﬁcally, we regard UDC restoration as a combination of tasks such as low-light enhancement, de-blurring, and de-noising.
Without loss of generality, our analysis focuses on two types of displays, a 4K Transparent Organic Light-Emitting
Diode (T-OLED) and a phone Pentile OLED (P-OLED), and a single camera type, a 2K FLIR RGB Point Grey re-search camera. To obtain the real imaging data and measure the optical factors of the system, we also propose a data ac-quisition system using the above optical elements.
In summary, the main contributions of our paper are: (1)
A brand new imaging system named Under-Display Cam-era (UDC) is deﬁned, measured and analyzed. Extensive experiments reveal the image degradation process of the system, inspiring better approaches for restoring the cap-tured images. (2) As a baseline, two practical and potential solutions are proposed, including conventional Wiener Fil-ter and the recent learning-based method. (3) Adopting the newly-assembled image acquisition system, we collect the
ﬁrst Under-Display Camera (UDC) dataset which will be released and evaluated by the public. 2.