Abstract
Despite considerable similarities between multiple ob-ject tracking (MOT) and single object tracking (SOT) tasks, modern MOT methods have not beneﬁted from the devel-opment of SOT ones to achieve satisfactory performance.
The major reason for this situation is that it is inappropri-ate and inefﬁcient to apply multiple SOT models directly to the MOT task, although advanced SOT methods are of the strong discriminative power and can run at fast speeds.
In this paper, we propose a novel and end-to-end train-able MOT architecture that extends CenterNet by adding an
SOT branch for tracking objects in parallel with the exist-ing branch for object detection, allowing the MOT task to beneﬁt from the strong discriminative power of SOT meth-ods in an effective and efﬁcient way. Unlike most existing
SOT methods which learn to distinguish the target object from its local backgrounds, the added SOT branch trains a separate SOT model per target online to distinguish the target from its surrounding targets, assigning SOT models the novel discrimination. Moreover, similar to the detec-tion branch, the SOT branch treats objects as points, making its online learning efﬁcient even if multiple targets are pro-cessed simultaneously. Without tricks, the proposed tracker achieves MOTAs of 0.710 and 0.686, IDF1s of 0.719 and 0.714, on MOT17 and MOT20 benchmarks, respectively, while running at 16 FPS on MOT17. 1.

Introduction
Multiple object tracking (MOT), which aims to estimate trajectories of multiple target objects in a video sequence, is a long-standing problem with many applications in mobile robotics, autonomous driving, and video surveillance anal-yses [26]. This problem is challenging because a successful method needs to not only detect the objects of interest accu-rately in each frame, but also associate them throughout the video. Moreover, fast running speeds are always desired.
Input 
Image
C
N
N
Backbone
Feature
Center-Aware 
Classification
CenterNet
Scale-Aware 
Regression
SOTMOT
Center-Based 
SOT Models
Figure 1: The architecture sketch of the proposed SOTMOT which extends CenterNet by adding a branch for tracking objects. The whole network can be trained in an end-to-end manner.
In recent years, many state-of-the-art methods [38, 42, 25] address the MOT problem by exploiting two modules: detection module to locate the objects of interest by bound-ing boxes in each frame and Re-ID one to associate each object to one of the existing trajectories. The latest ones,
JDE [36] and FairMOT [45], integrate the Re-ID module into a single-shot detector and allow the above two modules to be learned in a shared model, achieving high accuracy and fast running speed simultaneously. Despite competitive performance, it seems that they encounter bottlenecks in ro-bust object association, especially in crowded scenes. For instance, the top method, FairMOTv2, still performs rela-tively poorly on MOT20 [12], 0.673 in IDF1. Therefore, it may not be the only choice for MOT to associate same objects in different frames with the Re-ID technique.
It is well known that there are considerable similarities between MOT and single object tracking (SOT) tasks. They both are temporal problem and aim to estimate the trajecto-ries of target objects in videos under the challenges of dis-tracters, occlusions, and so on. In fact, it is no doubt that a multiple object tracker can be realized with multiple single ones [9, 52]. On the other hand, although the key issue of
MOT is usually considered as the object association while that of SOT not, we argue that if the class of the target were known and a detector could provide high-recall proposals in the search region of the target, SOT would also be treated 2453
Input Image common
SOT methods general  discrimination
SOT Model
SOT Model (a)
SOT Model our  method specific  discrimination
SOT Model
SOT Model (b)
SOT Model
Figure 2: Illustration of the samples used to train SOT models in most existing SOT methods (a) and our method (SOT branch) (b). The former needs to deal with a large amount of backgrounds, whereas ours only exploits a small number of foregrounds. as the problem of the association of proposals. Therefore, some techniques developed in SOT can be applied to MOT for the robust association.
Recently, discriminative model based methods [11, 4, 46, 47] have shown top performance in the ﬁeld of SOT. Nev-ertheless, if we treat the localization of each target object in MOT as an SOT task and apply an SOT model directly to track it (Fig. 2a), the following two problems will arise. (i) Inappropriate discrimination. Most existing SOT meth-ods train the discriminative model to distinguish the target from its local backgrounds, obtaining general discrimina-tion. However, the MOT task focuses more on the ability of the discriminative model to distinguish the target from its surrounding targets, i.e., speciﬁc discrimination, because most backgrounds can be ﬁltered out by the detector. (ii) Al-though advanced SOT methods can run at a high speed (40
FPS), the time consumption is still unacceptable if dozens of targets are to be tracked at the same time in MOT.
To solve the above problems, in this paper, we propose a novel and end-to-end trainable MOT architecture, allow-ing the MOT task, more speciﬁcally, the object association in MOT, to beneﬁt from the strong discriminative power of
SOT methods in an effective and efﬁcient way. As shown in
Fig. 1, we extend the CenterNet detector [50] by adding an
SOT branch for tracking objects in parallel with the exist-ing branch for object detection. To obtain the speciﬁc dis-crimination, unlike most existing SOT methods, the added
SOT branch trains a separate SOT model per target online to distinguish the target from its surrounding targets in the current frame (Fig. 2b). Afterwards, the trained SOT mod-els perform the object association (i.e., track the targets) in the next frame. This way, besides the stronger discrimi-native power for the MOT task, much more efﬁcient on-line learning and tracking (i.e., association) than the popular way of applying multiple SOT models directly to MOT are achieved, because foregrounds are much fewer than back-grounds. Moreover, to improve the efﬁciency further, simi-lar to the detection branch, the SOT branch treats objects as points. Speciﬁcally, given the center of an object on a fea-ture map, the object is represented by the feature vector at the center. Thereby, the SOT branch is able to run efﬁciently even though dozens of targets are present at the same time.
In ofﬂine training, the network receives a pair of images as its input.
In the SOT branch, SOT models are trained with one image, and tested with the other, as done in [47].
Then, the CenterNet detector and the feature embeddings for ridge regression based single object tracker [47] are jointly trained to achieve the optimal feature embeddings for both detecting target objects and distinguishing a target object from its surrounding similar ones. In online tracking, different from JDE and FairMOT, ridge regression based
SOT models, rather than Re-ID features, are used to asso-ciate the objects. Without tricks, the proposed tracker, SOT-MOT, achieves MOTAs of 0.710 and 0.686, IDF1s of 0.719 and 0.714, on MOT17 [27] and MOT20 [12] benchmarks, respectively, while running at 16 FPS on MOT17 (including detection time). As far as we know, among all trackers that introduce an SOT method into MOT task, our SOTMOT is the ﬁrst to achieve both state-of-the-art accuracy and fast running speed. We believe that our simple yet effective and efﬁcient approach will beneﬁt the future research on MOT, especially on the combination of SOT and MOT. 2.