Abstract
Multi-pedestrian trackers perform well when targets are clearly visible making the association task quite easy. How-ever, when heavy occlusions are present, a mechanism to re-identify persons is needed. The common approach is to ex-tract visual features from new detections and compare them with the features of previously found tracks. Since those de-tections can have substantial overlaps with nearby targets – especially in crowded scenarios – the extracted features are insufﬁcient for a reliable re-identiﬁcation. In contrast, we propose a novel occlusion handling strategy that explicitly models the relation between occluding and occluded tracks outperforming the feature-based approach, while not de-pending on a separate re-identiﬁcation network. Further-more, we improve the track management of a regression-based method in order to bypass missing detections and to deal with tracks leaving the scene at the border of the image.
Finally, we apply our tracker in both temporal directions and merge tracklets belonging to the same target, which fur-ther enhances the performance. We demonstrate the effec-tiveness of our tracking components with ablative experi-ments and surpass the state-of-the-art methods on the three popular pedestrian tracking benchmarks MOT16, MOT17, and MOT20. 1.

Introduction
The tracking of multiple pedestrians is an impor-tant component in many different applications, especially surveillance related tasks. The goal is to detect and identify each pedestrian in a video throughout the whole sequence by assigning every target a unique ID.
Most of the existing approaches follow the tracking-by-detection paradigm [4, 5, 28, 30, 32, 33, 34] ﬁrst generating a set of bounding boxes for each frame independently and then associating those detections to tracks based on motion patterns or visual cues. While this association step is easy to perform when all pedestrians are clearly visible, the prob-lem gets much harder in crowded scenes, where occlusions lead to missing detections. To recover pedestrians, many methods extract deep features from the detected bounding boxes with a re-identiﬁcation model [12, 28, 31, 33, 34].
The problems of these approaches are two-fold. First, besides the object detector, a separate network has to be trained, which is time consuming and increases the com-putational complexity of the whole tracking pipeline. Sec-ond, the image areas of the detected bounding boxes often include parts of nearby pedestrians, especially in crowded scenarios. This harms the representation ability of the ex-tracted visual features and can cause false re-identiﬁcations.
In contrast, we propose a new strategy to re-identify tar-gets that explicitly models the occlusion of pedestrians and only takes their motion into account. We introduce the con-cept of occluding and occluded tracks and check for new ar-riving detections, whether they belong to a previously found occluded track only considering its motion, thus removing the need for a separate re-identiﬁcation network.
The two new tracking states are combined with the idea of active and inactive tracks with a sophisticated track man-agement that also includes the termination of tracks which are leaving the scene. To utilize the recognized tracks in the consecutive frame, we follow the tracking-by-regression paradigm ﬁrst introduced in [2], where the regression head of a two-stage object detector is exploited to regress the pre-viously found bounding boxes to their new position, mak-ing the association step obsolete. We extend this regression to inactive tracks, while preferring active ones in the subse-quent non-maximum suppression (NMS) in order to allow a regression-based re-identiﬁcation without the confusion of active and inactive tracks under occlusion.
Furthermore, we propose an ofﬂine extension, which can be applied to any multi-object tracker, that exploits a video sequence in both temporal directions and merges interme-diate results to further boost the tracking performance.
The effectiveness of our components is shown with ab-lative experiments and state-of-the-art results are achieved on the three benchmarks MOT16 [23], MOT17 [23], and
MOT20 [8]. 10958
To summarize, the main contributions of our work are as follows:
• We propose a new strategy introducing the concepts of occluding and occluded tracks for re-identifying oc-cluded pedestrians without the need for a separate re-identiﬁcation network.
• The track management of a regression-based tracker is extended by our occlusion handling, the regression of inactive tracks to bypass missing detections, and the treatment of tracks moving over the image boundary.
• An ofﬂine extension is proposed that applies our tracker in both temporal directions and combines the results with a merging mechanism, which signiﬁcantly improves the overall performance. 2.