Abstract
FSRCNN
EDSR
Non-local SRN
Image super-resolution (SR) techniques have been de-veloping rapidly, beneﬁting from the invention of deep net-works and its successive breakthroughs. However, it is ac-knowledged that deep learning and deep neural networks are difﬁcult to interpret. SR networks inherit this mysterious nature and little works make attempt to understand them. In this paper, we perform attribution analysis of SR networks, which aims at ﬁnding the input pixels that strongly inﬂuence the SR results. We propose a novel attribution approach called local attribution map (LAM), which inherits the inte-gral gradient method yet with two unique features. One is to use the blurred image as the baseline input, and the other is to adopt the progressive blurring function as the path func-tion. Based on LAM, we show that: (1) SR networks with a wider range of involved input pixels could achieve bet-ter performance. (2) Attention networks and non-local net-works extract features from a wider range of input pixels. (3) Comparing with the range that actually contributes, the receptive ﬁeld is large enough for most deep networks. (4)
For SR networks, textures with regular stripes or grids are more likely to be noticed, while complex semantics are difﬁ-cult to utilize. Our work opens new directions for designing
SR networks and interpreting low-level vision deep models. 1.

Introduction
Deep learning has recently shown an explosive popular-ity in the ﬁeld of image super-resolution (SR) due to its superior performance and ﬂexibility. Various SR networks have been proposed to learn effective and abstract represen-tations for SR, expecting to continuously improve the SR performance. Despite their success, these SR networks re-main mysterious because what has been learned and how it contributes to their performance remain unclear. For ex-ample, whether larger receptive ﬁelds and multi-scale struc-HR Image
LR Image s t l u s e
R
R
S
M
A
L f o a e r
A n o i t u b i r t t
A n o i t u b i r t n o
C
Figure 1: Demo results of the proposed attribution method LAM for SR network interpretation. The LAM maps represent the im-portance of each pixel in the input LR image w.r.t. the SR of the patch marked with a red box. We also illustrate the area of contri-bution in the third line. Our LAM results indicate that FSRCNN
[12] only utilizes very limited information, EDSR [26] increases the range of information utilization but still fails to reconstruct ac-curate texture, and non-local network RNAN [50] can utilize a wider range of information for better SR result. tures are effective for SR networks? Why the attention and non-local schemes can help improve the SR results? How could different network architectures affect the information usage and the ﬁnal performance? We lack a systematic un-derstanding, and even research tools, towards these open questions.
In this paper, we propose to conduct attribution analysis of SR networks, aiming at ﬁnding input pixels that strongly inﬂuence the network outputs. The results are often visual-ized in the attribution maps where the most important pixels are highlighted. In this manner, we can analyze the pattern of information usage for SR networks, and evaluate whether a SR network could extract high-level semantic informa-tion. We show some representative results in Figure 1. In contrast to the attribution methods that are widely studied in 19199        
classiﬁcation networks, the SR networks have not witnessed the development and application of attribution techniques.
As the ﬁrst work that tries to build attribution method for
SR networks, we need to introduce several auxiliary prin-ciples. First, we argue that the attribution should be con-ducted in local patches rather than global images. Second, we should analyze patches that are difﬁcult to reconstruct.
Third, we propose to interpret the existence of speciﬁc fea-tures instead of pixel intensities. With these preliminaries, we present a new Local Attribution Map (LAM) to inter-pret SR networks. LAM employs path integral gradients to conduct attribution analysis. We use the blurred image as the baseline input and propose a novel progressively blur-ring function as the path function. These two strategies are specially designed for SR networks.
Using the proposed LAM method, we draw the follow-ing observations: (1) The range of pixels involved in the SR process has signiﬁcant impact to the ﬁnal SR performance.
SR networks with a wider range of involved pixels could achieve better performance. Thus deepening or widening the SR network could lead to better performance (under suf-ﬁcient training). (2) Attention and non-local schemes could help SR networks extract features from a wider range of in-put pixels. (3) For most deep networks, the receptive ﬁeld is much larger than the pixel range that actually contributes to the SR. Simply expanding the receptive ﬁeld will not in-volve more inﬂuential pixels. (4) For existing SR networks, textures with regular stripes or grids are more likely to be extracted, while complex semantics are difﬁcult to extract and utilize.
The above observations are beneﬁcial to SR research both scientiﬁcally and practically. The reasons are at least threefold, with the value of diagnostic for SR networks be-ing the ﬁrst. Understanding the mechanism that underlies these SR networks would intuitively tell us the effective-ness of the proposed method. Second, it would also have direct consequences on designing more efﬁcient architec-tures. Third, studying the interpretability of SR networks would also advance the science of deep learning applied to low-level vision tasks. In light of the above discussion, we hope our work can serve as a stepping stone towards a more formal understanding of SR networks. 2.