Abstract
Despite the data labeling cost for the object detection tasks being substantially more than that of the classiﬁca-tion tasks, semi-supervised learning methods for object de-In this paper, we tection have not been studied much. propose an Interpolation-based Semi-supervised learning method for object Detection (ISD), which considers and solves the problems caused by applying conventional In-terpolation Regularization (IR) directly to object detection.
We divide the output of the model into two types accord-ing to the objectness scores of both original patches that are mixed in IR. Then, we apply a separate loss suitable for each type in an unsupervised manner. The proposed losses dramatically improve the performance of semi-supervised learning as well as supervised learning.
In the super-vised learning setting, our method improves the baseline methods by a signiﬁcant margin.
In the semi-supervised learning setting, our algorithm improves the performance on a benchmark dataset (PASCAL VOC and MSCOCO) in a benchmark architecture (SSD). Our code is available at https://github.com/soo89/ISD-SSD 1.

Introduction
A dataset for object detection is much harder to create than the one for classiﬁcation. While there is only one class in a single image for the classiﬁcation task, there are multi-ple objects with different class labels in a single image for the object detection task. Therefore, the dataset for super-vised object detection requires a pair of a class label and bounding box information for each object. Labeling each object takes more than a few seconds, and creating these datasets requires hundreds of hours [19, 1, 9].
Due to the higher time and resource complexity for cre-ating object detection datasets, recently, methods for learn-ing with weakly labeled data (DW )1 or unlabeled data
∗corresponding author 1DL = (Ii, yi)NL (Ii, yi)NW the number of images, and Mi is the number of objects in the image Ii. i=1 where yi = (classj ) i=1 where yi = (classj , bboxj ) j=1, and DU = (Ii)NU
Mi j=1 , DW = i=1. Here, NX is
Mi
Figure 1. Supervised Learning (SL), Semi-supervised Learning (SSL), Weakly-Supervised Learning (WSL) and Weakly Semi-Supervised Learning (WSSL) for Object Detection. In this paper, we deal with SSL. (DU ) have been studied as opposed to learning with the labeled data (DL) only. There are mainly three types of object detection methods: weakly-supervised, semi-supervised, and weakly-semi-supervised learning. Weakly-supervised learning trains a model with a dataset that has only class information but no location information (DW )
[34, 20, 12, 28, 13]. On the other hand, weakly-semi-supervised learning is a learning method which uses DW as well as DL [22, 30]. Weakly-semi-supervised detec-tor improves its performance compared to that of weakly-supervised learning, but it still needs to label classes for
DW . In the setting of semi-supervised object detection, in-stead of DW , unlabeled data DU is utilized in combination with the labeled data (DL) [29, 18, 11] (See Fig. 1.).
In this paper, we address the semi-supervised ob-ject detection problem and propose a new method called
Interpolation-based Semi-supervised learning for object
Detection (ISD) whose loss terms can also be applied to the supervised learning framework.
Interpolation Regu-larization (IR) which mixes different images and learns 11602
Figure 2. (a) Mixed image created by random interpolation between images A and B (b) Type-I : both patches are from object classes. (c)
Type-II : one of the patches is from the background class. to predict the combined label rather than one hot vec-tor performs outstandingly in supervised learning as well as in semi-supervised learning for classiﬁcation problems
[32, 25, 26, 4, 27]. However, it is challenging to apply IR directly to object detection because the background class consists of a very diverse and irregular texture. Fig. 2 shows an example of applying IR to the object detection problem.
In Fig. 2(a), we mix image A and B using the mixing pa-rameter λ = 0.5 as shown in the middle. Obviously, the mixed green box has 50% of a dog and 50% of a bird as we can see in Fig. 2(b). However, when an object is mixed with a background as in Fig. 2(c), the mixed image appears to be an 100% object corrupted by noise. If the detector is trained by the conventional IR, any blurred or noisy mix-ture images contribute to increasing the conﬁdence of the background class, and it will degrade performance. On the other hand, if that sample is trained as a foreground object, it is expected to be robust to noise and to learn about various backgrounds around the object.
To tackle this problem, in this paper, we divide the mixed images into two types (Type-I and II) depending on whether one of the original images is the background or not.
Then, we apply a different IR algorithm suitable for each type. The proposed ISD method which will be detailed in
Sec. 3 can be combined with conventional semi-supervised learning methods such as CSD (consistency-based semi-supervised learning) [11] to improve the semi-supervised object detection performances. Also, the proposed scheme can be used to enhance the detection performance in the su-pervised learning framework. Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We show the problem in applying interpolation reg-ularization directly to the object detection task and propose a novel interpolation-based semi-supervised learning algorithm for object detection.
• In doing so, we deﬁne two types of interpolation in the object detection task and propose efﬁcient semi-supervised learning methods suitable for each type.
• We experimentally show the effectiveness of the pro-posed method for each type by demonstrating a sig-niﬁcant performance improvement over the conven-tional algorithms achieving SOTA semi-supervised ob-ject detection performance. 2.