Abstract
Human trajectory forecasting in crowds, at its core, is a sequence prediction problem with speciﬁc challenges of capturing inter-sequence dependencies (social interac-tions) and consequently predicting socially-compliant mul-timodal distributions.
In recent years, neural network-based methods have been shown to outperform hand-crafted methods on distance-based metrics. However, these data-driven methods still suffer from one crucial limitation: lack of interpretability. To overcome this limitation, we leverage the power of discrete choice models to learn in-terpretable rule-based intents, and subsequently utilise the expressibility of neural networks to model scene-speciﬁc residual. Extensive experimentation on the interaction-centric benchmark TrajNet++ demonstrates the effective-ness of our proposed architecture to explain its predictions without compromising the accuracy. 1.

Introduction
Humans naturally navigate through crowds by following the unspoken rules of social motion such as avoiding colli-sions or yielding right-of-way. Forecasting human motion in public places is a challenging, yet crucial task for the suc-cess of many applications like deployment of autonomous navigation systems [1, 2, 16], infrastructure design [29, 34] and evacuation analysis [24, 65]. Therefore, in the last few decades, developing models that can understand human so-cial interactions and forecast future trajectories has been an active and challenging area of research.
Early works designed hand-crafted methods based upon domain knowledge to forecast human trajectories, either with physics-based models such as Social Forces [25], or with pattern-based models such as discrete choice mod-elling (DCM) [7, 20, 8]. These models, based on domain knowledge, were successful in showcasing crowd phenom-ena like collision avoidance and leader-follower type behav-ior. Moreover, the hand-designed nature of these models rendered their predictions to be interpretable. However, hu-µ
µ
µ
Predicted anchors
Neural network refinement
Final predicted future sequence
Figure 1: While navigating in crowds, humans display var-ious social phenomena like collision avoidance (from red trajectory) and leader follower (towards blue trajectory).
We present a model that not only outputs accurate future tra-jectories but also provides a high-level rationale behind its predictions, owing to the interpretability of discrete choice models. (Un)favourable anchors shown in green (red). man motion in crowds is much more complex and due to its long-term nature, these ﬁrst-order methods suffer from predicting inaccurate trajectories.
Building on the success of recurrent neural network-based models in learning complex functions and long-term dependencies, Alahi et al.
[4] proposed the ﬁrst neural network (NN) based trajectory forecasting model, Social
LSTM, which outperformed the hand-crafted methods on distance-based metrics. Due to the success of Social LSTM, neural networks have become the de-facto choice for de-signing human trajectory models [21, 64, 66, 28, 19]. How-ever, current NN-based trajectory forecasting models suffer from a signiﬁcant limitation: lack of interpretability regard-ing the model’s decision-making process.
In this work, we are interested in combining the forces of the two paradigms of human trajectory forecasting (see
Fig. 1): the interpretability of the trajectories predicted by hand-crafted models, in particular discrete choice models 15556
[7, 50], and the high accuracy of the neural network-based predictions. With this objective, we propose a model that outputs a probability distribution over a discrete set of pos-sible future intents. This set is designed as a function of the pedestrian’s speed and direction of movement. Our model learns the probability distribution over these intents with the help of a choice model architecture, owing to its ability to output interpretable decisions. To this end, we resort to a novel hybrid and interpretable framework in DCM [55], where knowledge-based hand-crafted functions can be aug-mented with neural network representations, without com-promising the interpretability.
Our architecture augments each predicted high-level in-tent with a scene-speciﬁc residual term generated by a neu-ral network. The advantage of this is two-fold: ﬁrst, the residual allows to expand the output space of the model from a discrete distribution to a continuous one. Secondly, it helps to incorporate the complex social interactions as well as the long-term dependencies that the ﬁrst-order hand-crafted models fail to capture, leading to an increase in pre-diction accuracy. Overall, we can view our architecture as disentangling high-level coarse intents and lower-level scene-speciﬁc nuances of human motion.
We demonstrate the efﬁcacy of our proposed architec-ture on TrajNet++ [32], an interaction-centric human tra-jectory forecasting benchmark comprising of well-sampled real-world trajectories that undergo various social phenom-ena. Through extensive experimentation, we demonstrate that our method performs at par with competitive baselines on both real-world and synthetic datasets, while at the same time providing a rationale behind high-level decisions, an essential component required for safety-critical applications like autonomous systems. 2.