Abstract 1.

Introduction studies
This paper the problem of inverse cloth simulation—to estimate shape and time-varying poses of the underlying body that generates physically plausible cloth motion, which matches to the point cloud measure-ments on the clothed humans. A key innovation is to rep-resent the dynamics of the cloth geometry using a dynami-cal system that is controlled by the body states (shape and pose). This allows us to express the cloth motion as a re-sultant of external (skin friction and gravity) and internal (elasticity) forces. Inspired by the theory of optimal control, we optimize the body states such that the simulated cloth motion is matched to the point cloud measurements, and the analytic gradient of the simulator is back-propagated to update the body states. We propose a cloth relaxation scheme to initialize the cloth state, which ensures the physi-cal validity. Our method produces physically plausible and temporally smooth cloth and body movements that are faith-ful to the measurements, and shows superior performance compared to the existing methods. As a byproduct, the stress and strain that are applied to the body and clothes can be recovered.
The clothing worn by a person generates complex time-varying geometry, e.g., wrinkles and folds, as the person moves. This is a form of secondary motion, arising in re-sponse to the body movement due to physical forces ex-erted by the contact with body surface, gravity, and the fab-ric’s own material response. This behavior of cloth has been modeled in computer graphics [5, 10, 32] to produce phys-ically plausible character animation. On the other hand, computer vision methods have enabled reconstructing the static geometry of the clothes [1,2,11,16,33,34] that is faith-ful to the visual measurements of appearance and shape.
However, these approaches lack understanding of physics, resulting in non-interpretable and unrealistic cloth motion.
This paper studies a problem of inverse cloth simulation— to estimate the underlying body shape and time-varying pose that generates physically plausible cloth motion that matches to the proxy measurements of cloth geometry, e.g., time series of point clouds.
Inverse cloth simulation is a fundamentally ill-posed problem because of the primary function of the clothes, i.e., it is designed to cover and protect the body, resulting in self-occlusion. There exist multiple shape and pose con-ﬁgurations that can match to the given cloth geometry, e.g., 114698
a skinny person wearing a loose shirt vs. a doughy person wearing a tight shirt. Further, a cloth’s secondary motion is inherently time-varying whereas existing cloth modeling approaches based on a stationary relationship between body and cloth [1, 2, 16, 33] have limited expressibility on its dy-namics.
We address this challenge by representing the time-varying cloth geometry as a result of physical interactions with the body movement. Speciﬁcally, we model the dy-namics of the cloth using a dynamical system whose state is controlled by the movement history of the body states (shape and pose). Inspired by the theory of optimal con-trol [4], we provide a solution for the inverse simulation problem, by matching the dynamic cloth geometry to the measurements as optimizing over the body states. Figure 1 illustrates the dynamics of the clothes that align with the point cloud measurements, which produces physically plau-sible cloth and body motion.
Our method takes as input a sequence of 3D point sets capturing a moving clothed human, and reconstructs time-varying geometry of the clothes and the underlying body.
We initialize the cloth geometry by relaxing it to ﬁt the shape and pose of the undressed body at the ﬁrst time in-stant, parametrized by the SMPL model [23]. Given the equation of cloth motion that describes the rate of cloth ve-locity changes due to the external (skin friction and grav-ity) and internal (elasticity) forces, we use a differentiable physics simulator to solve the dynamical system, which generates the movement of the clothes in response to the body motion. We optimize the body state such that the dis-tance between the resulting time-varying geometry of the clothes and the 3D point measurements is minimized. To enable the optimization, we derive the analytic gradient of the simulator, which allows us to back-propagate the errors to update the body states.
We demonstrate that our method produces physically plausible and temporally smooth cloth and body motion that match to the noisy point cloud measurements. As a byproduct, the stress and strain that were applied to both the clothes and body can be recovered (Figure 1(c) and (d)).
Our method is agnostic to the type of the clothes, e.g., T-shirt, dress, and pants, and shows strong performance com-pared to the existing baselines that have lack of physics un-derstanding.
The main contributions of this paper include (1) a new formulation of a dynamical system that models the dynam-ics of the clothes as a function of the shape and time-varying pose of the body; (2) a novel application of optimal control that uses inverse simulation to optimize the body states to
ﬁt the time-varying cloth geometry to the measurement (3) an analytic gradient of the simulator that allows us to up-date the body states; (4) a cloth initialization scheme using a steady state cloth simulation as transforming the body from the T-pose to the pose at the ﬁrst time instant; (5) physically plausible reconstruction of the diverse types of the clothes faithful to the real-world measurements. 2.