Abstract
Neural implicit functions have emerged as a powerful representation for surfaces in 3D. Such a function can en-code a high quality surface with intricate details into the parameters of a deep neural network. However, optimiz-ing for the parameters for accurate and robust reconstruc-tions remains a challenge, especially when the input data is noisy or incomplete.
In this work, we develop a hy-brid neural surface representation that allows us to impose geometry-aware sampling and regularization, which signif-icantly improves the ﬁdelity of reconstructions. We propose to use iso-points as an explicit representation for a neural implicit function. These points are computed and updated on-the-ﬂy during training to capture important geometric features and impose geometric constraints on the optimiza-tion. We demonstrate that our method can be adopted to im-prove state-of-the-art techniques for reconstructing neural implicit surfaces from multi-view images or point clouds.
Quantitative and qualitative evaluations show that, com-pared with existing sampling and optimization methods, our approach allows faster convergence, better generalization, and accurate recovery of details and topology. 1.

Introduction
Reconstructing surfaces from real-world observations is a long-standing task in computer vision. Recently, repre-senting 3D geometry as a neural implicit function has re-ceived much attention [40, 36, 7]. Compared with other 3D shape representations, such as point clouds [29, 20, 54], polygons [24, 31, 39, 32], and voxels [8, 47, 35, 22], it pro-vides a versatile representation with inﬁnite resolution and unrestricted topology.
Fitting a neural implicit surface to input observations is an optimization problem. Some common application exam-ples include surface reconstruction from point clouds and multi-view reconstruction from images. For most cases, the observations are noisy and incomplete. This leads to fun-damental geometric and topological problems in the ﬁnal reconstructed surface, as the network overﬁts to the imper-fect data. We observe that this problem remains, and can become more prominent with the recent powerful architec-Figure 1: We propose a hybrid neural surface representation with implicit functions and iso-points, wich leads to accurate and robust surface recon-struction from imperfect data. The iso-points allows us to augment ex-isting optimization pipelines in a variety of ways: geometry-aware regu-larizers are incorporated to reconstruct a surface from a noisy point cloud (ﬁrst row); geometric details are preserved in multi-view reconstruction via feature-aware sampling (second row); iso-points can serve as a 3D prior to improve the topological accuracy of the reconstructed surface (third row). The input data are respectively: reconstructed point cloud [12] of model 122 of DTU-MVS dataset [21], multi-view rendered images of
DOG-WINGED model from Sketchfab dataset [55] and multi-view images of model 55 of DTU-MVS dataset tures, e.g. sine activations [45] and Fourier features [41].
We show examples of problems in ﬁtting neural implicit functions in Figure 1. When ﬁtting a neural surface to a noisy point cloud, “droplets” and bumps emerge where there are outlier points and holes (ﬁrst row); when ﬁtting a surface to image observations, ﬁne-grained geometric fea-tures are not captured due to under-sampling (second row); topological noise is introduced when inadequate views are available for reconstruction (third row).
In this work, we propose to alleviate these problems by introducing a hybrid neural surface representation using iso-points. The technique converts from an implicit neural surface to an explicit one via sampling iso-points, and goes back to the implicit representation via optimization. The 374
two-way conversion is performed on-the-ﬂy during training to introduce geometry-aware regularization and optimiza-tion. This approach unlocks a large set of fundamental tools from geometry processing to be incorporated for accurate and robust ﬁtting of neural surfaces.
A key challenge is to extract the iso-points on-the-ﬂy ef-ﬁciently and ﬂexibly during the training of a neural surface.
Extending several techniques from point-based geometry processing, we propose a multi-stage strategy, consisting of projection, resampling, and upsampling. We ﬁrst obtain a sparse point cloud on the implicit surface via projection, then resample the iso-points to ﬁx severely under-sampled regions, and ﬁnally upsample to obtain a dense point cloud that covers the surface. As all operations are GPU friendly and the resampling and upsampling steps require only local point distributions, the entire procedure is fast and practical for training.
We illustrate the utility of the new representation with a variety of applications, such as multi-view reconstruction and surface reconstruction from noisy point clouds. Quan-titative and qualitative evaluations show that our approach allows for fast convergence, robust optimization, and accu-rate reconstruction of details and topology. 2.