Abstract
Finding correspondences between shapes is a fundamen-tal problem in computer vision and graphics, which is rel-evant for many applications, including 3D reconstruction, object tracking, and style transfer. The vast majority of cor-respondence methods aim to ﬁnd a solution between pairs of shapes, even if multiple instances of the same class are available. While isometries are often studied in shape cor-respondence problems, they have not been considered ex-plicitly in the multi-matching setting. This paper closes this gap by proposing a novel optimisation formulation for isometric multi-shape matching. We present a suitable op-timisation algorithm for solving our formulation and pro-vide a convergence and complexity analysis. Our algorithm obtains multi-matchings that are by construction provably cycle-consistent. We demonstrate the superior performance of our method on various datasets and set the new state-of-the-art in isometric multi-shape matching. 1.

Introduction dence problems have a high relevance due to their plethora of applications, including 3D reconstruction, deformable object tracking, style transfer, shape analysis, or general data canonicalisation, e.g. to facilitate learning by establish-ing a common vector space representation.
There are certain problem formulations that cover generic correspondence problems involving different types of data and varying application scenarios. One exam-ple is the widely-studied quadratic assignment problem (QAP) [36]. Due to its NP-hardness [53], reasonably large
QAPs cannot be solved satisfactorily in most settings. How-ever, contrary to bringing generic objects (e.g. graphs) into correspondence, when considering 3D shapes it is possible to exploit particular structural properties in order to effec-tively solve the shape matching problem.
For example, it has been demonstrated that explicitly modelling the low-dimensional structure of shape matching problems often allows to ﬁnd global optima for a wide range of shape matching formulations [5]. It was also shown that learning suitable feature representations from shapes im-proves the matching performance drastically compared to using hand-crafted features [40].
The identiﬁcation of correspondences between 3D shapes, also known as the shape matching problem, is a longstanding challenge in visual computing. Correspon-Moreover, when assuming (near)-isometries between shapes, efﬁcient and powerful spectral approaches can be
Isometries describe leveraged for shape matching [51]. 14183
classes of deformable shapes of the same type but in dif-ferent poses, e.g. humans or animals who are able to adopt a variety of poses. Potential applications for isometric shape matching include AR/VR or template matching. While (near)-isometric shape matching has been studied exten-sively for the case of matching a pair of shapes, the iso-metric multi-shape matching problem, where an entire col-lection of (near-isometric) shapes is to be matched, is less explored. Important applications of isometric multi-shape matching include learning low-dimensional shape space representations [82], motion tracking and reconstruction.
In principle, any pairwise shape matching method can be used for matching a shape collection. To do so, one can select one of the shapes as reference, and then solve a se-quence of pairwise shape matching problems between each of the remaining shapes and the reference. However, a ma-jor disadvantage is that such an approach has a strong bias due to the choice of the reference. Alternatively, one could solve pairwise shape matching problems between all pairs of shapes in the shape collection. Although this way there is no bias, in general the resulting correspondences are not cycle-consistent. As such, matching shape A via shape B to shape C, may lead to a different correspondence than match-ing shape A directly to C.
In order to achieve cycle consistency, so-called per-mutation synchronisation methods can be used as post-processing [52]. A disadvantage of synchronisation-based multi-shape matching is that it is a two-stage procedure, where pairwise matchings are obtained in the ﬁrst procee-dure, and synchronization is assured in the second. With that, the matching results are often suboptimal – even if one reverts to an alternating procedure using a soft coupling
[63]. For isometric multi-shape matching this sequential procedure is particularly disadvantageous, since during the second stage the very strong prior about the isometric nature of the shapes is completely ignored.
Although multi-matchings obtained by synchronisation procedures are cycle-consistent, the matchings are often spatially non-smooth and noisy, as illustrated in Sec. 5.
From a theoretical point of view, the most appropriate ap-proach for addressing multi-shape matching is based on a uniﬁed formulation, where cycle consistency is assured al-ready when the multi-matchings are computed. Although some approaches ﬁt into this category [17, 8], none of the existing methods are tailored explicitly towards isometric matching in order to take full advantage in this setting.
In this work we ﬁll this gap by introducing a gener-alisation of state-of-the-art isometric two-shape matching approaches towards isometric multi-shape matching. We demonstrate that explicitly exploiting the isometry property leads to a natural and elegant formulation that achieves im-proved results compared to previous methods. Our main contributions can be summarised as:
• A novel optimisation formulation for isometric multi-shape matching.
• An efﬁcient and easy-to-implement algorithm with provable convergence.
• Guaranteed cycle-consistency without enforcing ex-plicit constraints.
• Improvements over the state-of-the-art on various shape matching benchmarks. 2.