Abstract
Many attempts have been made to hide information in images, where one main challenge is how to increase the payload capacity without the container image being de-tected as containing a message. In this paper, we propose a large-capacity Invertible Steganography Network (ISN) for image steganography. We take steganography and the recovery of hidden images as a pair of inverse problems on image domain transformation, and then introduce the forward and backward propagation operations of a single invertible network to leverage the image embedding and extracting problems. Sharing all parameters of our sin-gle ISN architecture enables us to efﬁciently generate both the container image and the revealed hidden image(s) with high quality. Moreover, in our architecture the capacity of image steganography is signiﬁcantly improved by natu-rally increasing the number of channels of the hidden image branch. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that with this signiﬁcant improvement of the steganography payload capacity, our ISN achieves state-of-the-art in both visual and quantitative comparisons. 1.

Introduction
Steganography is the art of hiding some secret data by embedding it into a host medium that is not secret. Differ-ent from cryptography which hides the meaning of the data (or makes it unintelligible), steganography aims to hide the existence of the data [11,42]. Accordingly, image steganog-raphy refers to the process of hiding data within an im-age ﬁle. The image chosen for hosting the hidden data named the host- or cover-image, and the image generated by steganography is called the container- or stego-image.
Nowadays, image steganography is used in digital commu-nication, copyright protection, information certiﬁcation, e-commerce, and many other practical ﬁelds [11].
A well-designed image steganography system is ex-∗indicates equal contribution. (a) Host/container (b) 4 revealed images
Figure 1. We generate a container image by hiding 4 other images into the host image. Guess which is the container image in the left column? Answer: the top-left and bottom-left are the container and host images, respectively. (b): 4 hidden images revealed from the container image. These 6 images have the same resolution. pected to have both the imperceptibility and payload capac-ity requirements [33]. Firstly, the container image should avoid arousing suspicion. This means that the hidden data should not be detected under steganalysis, which is the countermeasure of steganography. As shown in Fig. 1, when the hidden images are embedded into the host image, if the generated container image appears similar to the host image in terms of its color and other features, then it would be difﬁcult for image steganalysis techniques [18,24] to dis-tinguish between the host and container images. Therefore, image steganography essentially asks for a powerful image representation mechanism that can effectively approximate the host image with the “noise” of the hidden images. This process is also expected to be reversible, because the hidden images should be well recovered from the container image in the decoding process of image steganography. Besides that, to make image steganography applications more efﬁ-cient in practice, another important aspect is to embed as much hidden data as possible into the host image.
Existing image steganography solutions [8, 40, 62] still cannot perfectly simultaneously achieve good impercep-tibility with high payload capacity. Traditional methods 10816
usually hide messages in the spatial, transform, or some adaptive domains [33], with the payload capacities around 0.2 ∼ 4 bits per pixel (bpp). For most of them, the hidden data is embedded into the least signiﬁcance bits (LSBs) [8] or insensitive areas that are detected with low-level vision descriptors, meaning that only a small amount of hidden in-formation can be embedded. Several recent deep learning-based hiding methods [4, 5] successfully ﬁnd a potential route to increase the hiding capacity. However, once the im-age steganography system consists of different neural net-works that are separately designed for the preprocessing, steganography, and recovery tasks, the components of the whole system are independent of each other and the pa-rameters are not shared. It would thus be difﬁcult to ﬁnd a trade-off between making the container statistically indis-tinguishable and recovering the high-quality hidden image.
In this paper, we introduce a large-capacity image steganography approach based on the invertible neural net-work (INN) [14,15,58]. We take the task of hiding an image as a special image domain transformation task, where the container image should be as close as possible to the host image. In its reverse process, the hidden images should also be well reconstructed from the container image. Therefore, we take image steganography and recovery as a pair of in-verse problems, and thus introduce an Invertible Steganog-raphy Network (ISN) to effectively solve them. Our novel solution takes the same ISN for both steganography and re-covery, where all the parameters are fully shared in such two tasks. This methodology enables us to efﬁciently generate both the container image and the revealed hidden image(s).
Our ISN network consists of two branches, naturally corre-sponding to the input hidden and host images, respectively.
Moreover, in our architecture, the steganography capacity can be substantially improved by increasing the number of channels of the hidden image branch. Comprehensive ex-periments demonstrate that our method can generate a de-sired container image with high payloads for hiding images, and with the same framework, we successfully reveal such multiple hidden images (Fig. 1 shows hiding 4 images).
In summary, the main contributions of this paper are:
• We introduce an Invertible Steganography Network (ISN) to effectively solve image steganography and re-covery problems. Our bijective transformation model uses a single network to efﬁciently hide and reveal im-ages.
• Our method signiﬁcantly improves the steganography payload capacity to 24 ∼ 120 bpp, and it can be easily adapted to hide multiple images with high impercepti-bility.
• A comprehensive set of qualitative and quantitative ex-periments show that our method achieves state-of-the-art steganography and recovery results. 2.