Abstract
Existing view synthesis methods mainly focus on the per-spective images and have shown promising results. How-ever, due to the limited ﬁeld-of-view of the pinhole cam-era, the performance quickly degrades when large cam-In this paper, we make the era movements are adopted.
ﬁrst attempt to generate novel views from a single indoor panorama and take the large camera translations into con-sideration. To tackle this challenging problem, we ﬁrst use
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to extract the deep features and estimate the depth map from the source-view image. Then, we leverage the room layout prior, a strong structural constraint of the indoor scene, to guide the gen-eration of target views. More concretely, we estimate the room layout in the source view and transform it into the target viewpoint as guidance. Meanwhile, we also con-strain the room layout of the generated target-view images to enforce geometric consistency. To validate the effective-ness of our method, we further build a large-scale photo-realistic dataset containing both small and large camera translations. The experimental results on our challeng-ing dataset demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance. The project page is at https:
//github.com/bluestyle97/PNVS. 1.

Introduction
With the popularity of 360◦ cameras, panoramas have been widely used in many emerging domains such as Vir-tual Reality (VR). In a typical VR application, the de-vice displays a 360◦ virtual scene, which can respond to 6 degree-of-freedom (DoF) head motion and give the user an immersive feeling. However, owing to the tedious im-age collection process, the panoramas are usually captured at a limited set of locations in practice, which restricts the
∗Corresponding author. source view target view source camera target camera
𝒕
Figure 1. Panoramic novel view synthesis. Our goal is to gener-ate a target-view panorama from the source-view panorama with camera translation t. The green, red, and blue lines represent the ceiling-wall boundaries, wall-wall boundaries, and ﬂoor-wall boundaries of the room layout, respectively.
DoF of scene viewing. With the expectation of providing a free-viewpoint scene visualization experience, we make the ﬁrst attempt to address the problem of panoramic novel view synthesis from a single panorama.
In this paper, we constrain the panoramic view synthesis problem in the indoor scenario on account of its common-ness in typical applications. Previous work [30, 36, 39] has shown promising results on novel view synthesis from a sin-gle perspective image. However, the performance quickly degrades when larger camera rotations and translations are adopted. Due to the limited ﬁeld-of-view (FoV) of a pinhole camera, it is arduous to extrapolate the large unseen areas caused by violent camera motion. In contrast, a panorama inherently supports the rotational viewpoint change. Thus, we only need to consider camera translations. Furthermore, 360◦ FoV provides omnidirectional information, making it possible to consider larger camera translations. By synthe-16438
sizing panoramic novel views, we can create new 360◦ con-tents to achieve 6-DoF scene viewing, which could poten-tially beneﬁt many applications, such as virtual house tours.
The main challenge of novel view synthesis lies in recov-ering the missing areas caused by viewpoint change, and the difﬁculty is ampliﬁed when considering large camera trans-lations. Fortunately, a panorama contains more structural information than a perspective image that can be exploited to reduce the difﬁculty. Previous work on image inpaint-ing [23, 28] has proven the effectiveness of structural in-formation to guide the content generation process. In the indoor scenario, the most common and easy-obtained struc-tural information is the room layout, i.e., the ceiling-wall boundaries, ﬂoor-wall boundaries, and wall-wall bound-aries. The synthesized images have to keep the room layout reasonable, especially when large camera translations are adopted.
Inspired by the state-of-the-art view synthesis frame-work [39], we propose a novel method to tackle the panoramic view synthesis problem and exploit the room layout as a prior and geometric constraint. The proposed method is composed of three stages. In the ﬁrst stage, we use CNNs to extract a dense feature map, a depth map, and room layout from the source-view panorama. In the sec-ond stage, we transform the extracted feature map and room layout into the target view with a spherical geometric trans-formation process and fuse them to synthesize the target panorama.
In the ﬁnal stage, we estimate the room lay-out of the synthesized panorama and enforce the estimated layout consistent with the transformed target-view layout in the preceding stage.
To validate the effectiveness of our method and facilitate the research on this novel task, we further build a large-scale photo-realistic dataset upon Structured3D dataset [53]. The rendered images are high-ﬁdelity, making the dataset close to realistic application scenarios. Besides the typical set-tings of previous work, our dataset also considers large cam-era translations to push the boundaries of the view synthesis task. We split our dataset into an easy set and a hard set ac-cording to the camera translation. The easy set contains target panoramas with small camera translations ranging from 0.2 m to 0.3 m, including 13 080 training images and 1791 testing images. The hard set contains target panora-mas with large camera translations ranging from 1 m to 2 m, including 17 661 training images and 2279 testing images.
In summary, the main contributions of this paper are as follows: (i) We are the ﬁrst to tackle the problem of synthesizing panoramic novel views from a single indoor panorama. (ii) We propose a novel layout-guided method to tackle this challenging task, which is able to handle large camera translations. (iii) We build a new high-quality and challenging dataset for this novel task, which contains small and large camera translations. (iv) The experimental results demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art per-formance on this novel task and can be generalized to real datasets. 2.