Abstract
Capturing photographs with wrong exposures remains a major source of errors in camera-based imaging. Expo-sure problems are categorized as either: (i) overexposed, where the camera exposure was too long, resulting in bright and washed-out image regions, or (ii) underexposed, where the exposure was too short, resulting in dark regions. Both under- and overexposure greatly reduce the contrast and vi-sual appeal of an image. Prior work mainly focuses on un-derexposed images or general image enhancement. In con-trast, our proposed method targets both over- and underex-posure errors in photographs. We formulate the exposure correction problem as two main sub-problems: (i) color en-hancement and (ii) detail enhancement. Accordingly, we propose a coarse-to-ﬁne deep neural network (DNN) model, trainable in an end-to-end manner, that addresses each sub-problem separately. A key aspect of our solution is a new dataset of over 24,000 images exhibiting the broadest range of exposure values to date with a corresponding properly exposed image. Our method achieves results on par with ex-isting state-of-the-art methods on underexposed images and yields signiﬁcant improvements for images suffering from overexposure errors. 1.

Introduction
The exposure used at capture time directly affects the overall brightness of the ﬁnal rendered photograph. Digital cameras control exposure using three main factors: (i) cap-ture shutter speed, (ii) f-number, which is the ratio of the fo-cal length to the camera aperture diameter, and (iii) the ISO value to control the ampliﬁcation factor of the received pixel signals. In photography, exposure settings are represented by exposure values (EVs), where each EV refers to differ-ent combinations of camera shutter speeds and f-numbers that result in the same exposure effect—also referred to as
‘equivalent exposures’ in photography.
By Floris van Lint (Flickr: CC BY-NC 2.0) e r u s o p x e r e v
O e r u s o p x e r e d n
U
By J M Ar (Flickr: CC BY-NC-SA 2.0)
Input image
Our result
Figure 1: Photographs with over- and underexposure errors and the results of our method using a single model for expo-sure correction. These sample input images are taken from outside our dataset to demonstrate the generalization of our trained model.
Digital cameras can adjust the exposure value of cap-tured images for the purpose of varying the brightness lev-els. This adjustment can be controlled manually by users or performed automatically in an auto-exposure (AE) mode.
When AE is used, cameras adjust the EV to compensate for low/high levels of brightness in the captured scene using through-the-lens (TTL) metering that measures the amount of light received from the scene [49].
Exposure errors can occur due to several factors, such as errors in measurements of TTL metering, hard lighting con-ditions (e.g., very low lighting and backlighting), dramatic changes in the brightness level of the scene, and errors made by users in the manual mode. Such exposure errors are in-troduced early in the capture process and are thus hard to correct after rendering the ﬁnal 8-bit image. This is due to the highly nonlinear operations applied by the camera image signal processor (ISP) afterwards to render the ﬁnal 8-bit standard RGB (sRGB) image [31].
∗This work was done while Mahmoud Aﬁﬁ was an intern at the SAIC.
Fig. 1 shows typical examples of images with exposure 9157
errors. In Fig. 1, exposure errors result in either very bright image regions, due to overexposure, or very dark regions, caused by underexposure errors, in the ﬁnal rendered im-ages. Correcting images with such errors is a challeng-ing task even for well-established image enhancement soft-ware packages, see Fig. 9. Although both over- and un-derexposure errors are common in photography, most prior work is mainly focused on correcting underexposure er-rors [23, 56, 58, 65, 66] or generic image quality enhance-ment [11, 18].
Contributions We propose a coarse-to-ﬁne deep learning method for exposure error correction of both over- and un-derexposed sRGB images. Our approach formulates the ex-posure correction problem as two main sub-problems: (i) color and (ii) detail enhancement. We propose a coarse-to-ﬁne deep neural network (DNN) model, trainable in an end-to-end manner, that begins by correcting the global color in-formation and subsequently reﬁnes the image details. In ad-dition to our DNN model, a key contribution to the exposure correction problem is a new dataset containing over 24,000 images1 rendered from raw-RGB to sRGB with different exposure settings with broader exposure ranges than previ-ous datasets. Each image in our dataset is provided with a corresponding properly exposed reference image. Lastly, we present an extensive set of evaluations and ablations of our proposed method with comparisons to the state of the art. We demonstrate that our method achieves results on par with previous methods dedicated to underexposed im-ages and yields signiﬁcant improvements on overexposed images. Furthermore, our model generalizes well to images outside our dataset. 2.