Abstract
Snapshot hyperspectral imaging has been developed to capture the spectral information of dynamic scenes. In this paper, we propose a deep neural network by learning the tensor low-rank prior of hyperspectral images (HSI) in the feature domain to promote the reconstruction quality. Our method is inspired by the canonical-polyadic (CP) decom-position theory, where a low-rank tensor can be expressed as a weight summation of several rank-1 component ten-sors. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst learn the tensor low-rank prior of the image features with two steps: (a) we generate rank-1 tensors with discriminative components to collect the con-textual information from both spatial and channel dimen-sions of the image features; (b) we aggregate those rank-1 tensors into a low-rank tensor as a 3D attention map to ex-ploit the global correlation and reﬁne the image features.
Then, we integrate the learned tensor low-rank prior into an iterative optimization algorithm to obtain an end-to-end
HSI reconstruction. Experiments on both synthetic and real data demonstrate the superiority of our method. 1.

Introduction
Hyperspectral imaging systems capture the spectral in-formation of the scene across tens to hundreds of discrete bands. The rich spectral details are beneﬁcial to various computer vision tasks, such as face recognition[28], object-ing tracking [16] and appearance modeling [26]. To ob-tain the 3D hyperspectral image (HSI), conventional hy-perspectral imaging systems [4, 30, 33, 46] scan the scene with multiple exposures, which makes those systems can-not be used in the dynamic scenes. To this end, numerous snapshot hyperspectral imaging systems have been devel-oped [7, 13, 27, 49] in the last few decades. Based on the compressive sensing theory [3, 6, 22], coded aperture snap-shot spectral imaging (CASSI) [2, 36] draws an increas-ing attention due to the promising ability in capturing the dynamic target. However, the bottleneck of CASSI is the limited quality of reconstructing the 3D HSI from the 2D
*Corresponding author
Figure 1: Development trends of the HSI priors. Model based methods and learning based methods show a similar development trend in both image priors and reconstruction accuracy (PSNR). We exploit the tensor low-rank prior with deep learning and obtain the best reconstruction result. compressive measurement. Since this problem is under-determined, exploiting the image intrinsic prior is essential to regularize the reconstruction solution.
So far, two kinds of methods, i.e., model based methods and learning based methods, have been developed to exploit the image prior for HSI reconstruction and show a similar development trend, as shown in Figure 1.
In model based methods, numerous priors, from piece-wise smoothing prior [42, 50], sparsity prior [35, 41] to low-rank prior [15, 24], are proposed to ﬁnish HSI re-construction with conventional iterative optimization algo-rithms. Besides, different data structures, from 2D matrix to 3D tensor, have been employed to characterize those priors.
Among these priors, the tensor low-rank prior stands out as a convincing way to model the high contextual correla-tion in the high-dimensional structure [52]. However, these priors equipped with conventional optimization algorithms suffer from low computational efﬁciency in practice.
In deep learning, including piecewise image priors, smoothing [12, 45] and sparsity prior [39, 47], are charac-terized by neural networks for HSI reconstruction. They usually exploit those priors in the feature domain. Meth-ods in this venues have obtained promising reconstruction accuracy and efﬁciency. However, they do not take the low-rank prior into consideration, especially in tensor structure, which limits the improvement of reconstruction quality. 112006
In nature images, structures in different frequencies carry discriminative structures. Actually, the feature maps in con-volution networks can also be treated as a mixture of struc-tures at different frequencies. Meanwhile, the features pos-sess rich redundancy and high contextual correlation like the original image [11, 32]. An interesting and meaning-ful question arises: can the low-rank prior in tensor struc-ture be explicitly characterized with the image features, like the prior regularization in model-based methods? This new prior, once realized, could promote HSI reconstruction with both accuracy and efﬁciency.
In this paper, we propose a novel deep neural network by exploiting the tensor low-rank prior of HSI in the fea-ture domain to boost the reconstruction performance for snapshot hyperspectral imaging. Our method is inspired by the canonical-polyadic (CP) decomposition theory, where a low-rank tensor can be expressed as the weight summa-tion of several rank-1 individual component tensors with discriminative structures. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst character-ize the tensor low-rank prior of the image features with two steps: (a) we generate rank-1 tensors with discriminative components to collect the contextual information from both spatial and channel dimensions of the image features; (b) we aggregate those rank-1 tensors into a low-rank tensor as a 3D attention map to exploit the global correlation and re-ﬁne the image features. Then, we integrate the learned ten-sor low-rank prior into the half quadratic splitting (HQS) based optimization algorithm to obtain an end-to-end HSI reconstruction. Experiments on both synthetic and real data demonstrate the superiority of our method.
In summary, we make the following contributions: (1). We propose a deep neural network to characterize the tensor low-rank prior of HSI in the feature domain. (2). We characterize the tensor low-rank prior by exploiting the contextual correlation of the image features with
CP decomposition. (3). We obtain an end-to-end HSI reconstruction by inte-grating the image prior into the HQS algorithm. 2.