Abstract
Input Space
Cluster-Friendly Space
Seed Distribution
Superpixel
Superpixel is generated by automatically clustering pix-els in an image into hundreds of compact partitions, which is widely used to perceive the object contours for its excel-lent contour adherence. Although some works use the Con-volution Neural Network (CNN) to generate high-quality superpixel, we challenge the design principles of these net-works, speciﬁcally for their dependence on manual labels and excess computation resources, which limits their ﬂexi-bility compared with the traditional unsupervised segmen-tation methods. We target at redeﬁning the CNN-based su-perpixel segmentation as a lifelong clustering task and pro-pose an unsupervised CNN-based method called LNS-Net.
The LNS-Net can learn superpixel in a non-iterative and lifelong manner without any manual labels. Speciﬁcally, a lightweight feature embedder is proposed for LNS-Net to efﬁciently generate the cluster-friendly features. With those features, seed nodes can be automatically assigned to clus-ter pixels in a non-iterative way. Additionally, our LNS-Net can adapt the sequentially lifelong learning by rescaling the gradient of weight based on both channel and spatial context to avoid overﬁtting. Experiments show that the pro-posed LNS-Net achieves signiﬁcantly better performance on three benchmarks with nearly ten times lower complexity compared with other state-of-the-art methods. 1.

Introduction
Superpixel segmentation aims to over-segment an im-age into hundreds of compact partitions, i.e. superpixel, by clustering the pixels based on both low-level color features and spatial features. Beneﬁting from concerning the spatial cues, the superpixel can be efﬁciently generated with high contour adherence. Therefore, it is widely used by both traditional machine learning (ML) and convolution neural network (CNN) to reduce computational complexity or per-ceive the contours of objects[32, 12, 3, 31].
Many superpixel segmentation methods arise in the last
FEM
Eq.1,2
NCM-SEL
Eq.3-5
NCM-CL
Eq.6,7
Label Jetting
Figure 1. The illustration of the workﬂow for the proposed LNS-Net, where the top row is the visualization of the features and the bottom is the distribution of the labels jetting in the feature space.
The blue ”x” is the generated seed node. decade including the gradient-based[1, 2, 18, 19, 5] and the graph-based methods[17, 15, 13, 16]. The gradient-based methods iteratively cluster the pixels in RGB or LAB space with limited spatial distance to reﬁne the initialized cluster centers. This type of method has high efﬁciency, but suffers from low adherence due to their insufﬁcient features. On the other hand, the graph-based algorithms usually have high adherence because they enrich the features by constructing an undirected graph. Afterwards, the subgraphs are gener-ated as superpixel by cutting or adding edges to optimize a target energy function, which costs a lot of time.
Recently, beneﬁting from the prosperity of the CNN, some approaches employ the CNN to learn a suitable em-bedding space for superpixel segmentation and then clus-ter the pixels in this new feature space with clustering methods[11, 27, 30, 28]. Even though they improve the performance by a large margin, some problems come into being simultaneously. Firstly, majority of the CNN-based methods[30, 11, 28] need human-labeled ground truth to su-pervise the network training which requires additional hu-man resources to label all the pixels in images. Secondly, their ofﬂine training step needs to store all the training sam-ples, which demands large amounts of memory and limits their ﬂexibility to transfer the network into other domains.
Finally, some CNN-based methods still need to iteratively update the coarse cluster centers (usually the center position 1225
of each grids), which is inconvenient and time-consuming.
To solve these problems, we redeﬁne the CNN-based su-perpixel segmentation as a lifelong learning task[22, 9, 4] which can sequentially learn a uniﬁed model online. In ad-dition, a lightweight unsupervised CNN-based superpixel segmentation method called LNS-Net is proposed to learn superpixel in a non-iterative and lifelong manner. The LNS-Net is composed of three parts: feature embedder module (FEM), non-iterative clustering module (NCM) and gradi-ent rescaling module (GRM). Speciﬁcally, in the forward step shown in Fig. 1, FEM ﬁrstly embeds the original fea-ture into a cluster-friendly space to protect detail cues with low complexity. Based on the cluster-friendly features, the proposed NCM uses a seed estimation layer (SEL) to learn the spatial shift of the central position, which directly es-timates the optimal cluster centers, i.e. the seed nodes.
Then, the superpixel can be non-iteratively generated by the cluster layer (CL) of NCM that assigns the cluster for each pixel based on their similarity with the feature of seed nodes. Moreover, the GRM is proposed to solve the catas-trophic forgetting caused by lifelong learning during back-ward step. It is consisted of gradient adaptive layer (GAL) and gradient bi-direction layer (GBL), which are used to avoid over-ﬁtting by rescaling the gradient of each weight parameter based on channel importance and spatial context.
A range-limited cluster loss is also proposed to effectively train our network without any manual labels.
In a nutshell, our main contributions are threefold: 1) To our knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst to deﬁne the superpixel segmentation as lifelong learning task theoretically and give a corresponding solution. 2) A lightweight LNS-Net is pro-posed to non-iteratively generate the superpixel, which can be lifelong trained without any manual label. 3) Experi-ments show that our LNS-Net has higher performance than other unsupervised methods and is also comparable with the supervised CNN-based methods. 2.