Abstract
#9
#473
#491
Despite the great success of Siamese-based trackers, their performance under complicated scenarios is still not satisfying, especially when there are distractors. To this end, we propose a novel Siamese relation network, which i.e. Relation Detector introduces two efﬁcient modules, (RD) and Reﬁnement Module (RM). RD performs in a meta-learning way to obtain a learning ability to ﬁlter the dis-tractors from the background while RM aims to effectively integrate the proposed RD into the Siamese framework to generate accurate tracking result. Moreover, to further im-prove the discriminability and robustness of the tracker, we introduce a contrastive training strategy that attempts not only to learn matching the same target but also to learn how to distinguish the different objects. Therefore, our tracker can achieve accurate tracking results when fac-ing background clutters, fast motion, and occlusion. Ex-perimental results on ﬁve popular benchmarks, including
VOT2018, VOT2019, OTB100, LaSOT, and UAV123, show that the proposed method is effective and can achieve state-of-the-art results. The code will be available at https:
//github.com/hqucv/siamrn
#245
#269
#290
#280
#316
#378
Ground-truth
Ours
DiMP
SiamBAN
Figure 1. Tracking Result of our Siamese relation network with two state-of-the-art trackers in VOT2018 [22]. Beneﬁting from our Relation Detector and Reﬁnement Module, when facing sim-ilar distractors, appearance change and complex background, our tracker is more robust to these challenges and gets more accurate results. Figure 4 further shows the ability to ﬁltering distractors from the target region. 1.

Introduction
Visual object tracking, which is the fundamental task in computer vision, has received much attention over the last decades [17, 64, 63, 65]. It aims to capture the posi-tion of an arbitrary target accurately by given only its ini-tial state [29]. With the increasing demand for the prac-tical application such as autonomous driving [30], robotics,
*Corresponding author. surveillance [56] and human-computer interaction [33], cur-rent trackers require not only accuracy but also speed and robustness to overcome the existing challenges, such as oc-clusions, fast motions, appearance deformations, illumina-tion change, and background clutters [55], etc.
Owing to the development of CNN and the various net-work architectures, we can unveil the powerful deep feature for computer vision tasks [24]. In recent years, the Siamese network based trackers [6, 3, 27, 66, 26] have drawn great 4421
attention due to their balanced speed and performance.
However, there still exists a gap of robustness between the Siamese trackers and the discriminative trackers that are equipped with an update mechanism [4, 8, 5, 57, 22], which can be manifested in the occasion of tracking failure when encountering similar distractors or background clut-ters. This is because the training setting of the Siamese trackers is only to match the same target in abundance of im-age pairs and ignore to distinguish their difference. There-fore, the discriminability for Siamese trackers is deﬁcient when addressing complicated situations. Meanwhile, the target is incompetent to be highlighted due to the Siamese-style cropping strategy, which may introduce the distrac-tive context. Moreover, the classiﬁcation and regression branches, which are two signiﬁcant pillars in Siamese-based trackers, are usually optimized independently [6, 26, 27], increasing the probability of mismatch between them dur-ing tracking. To be speciﬁc, the box corresponding to the position with the highest classiﬁcation conﬁdence is not the most accurate one for the tracked target.
To address the above issues, we propose a novel Siamese relation network, which introduces two efﬁcient modules named as Relation Detector (RD) and Reﬁnement Moudle (RM). RD aims to learn the ability to ﬁlter the distractors from background via meta-learning. Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne two categories labeled as target and non-target. Given the training pairs assigned with the label, we perform a two-way one-shot learning, which intends to measure the re-lationship between them by the nonlinear learnable com-parators. Therefore the distractors are ﬁltered out due to low-relevant relationships. The RM is used to integrate the information obtained by RD and the classiﬁcation branch to reﬁne the tracking results, alleviating the mismatch be-tween classiﬁcation and regression branches. Furthermore, we equip RD with a contrastive training strategy that at-tempts not only to learn matching the same target but also pay attention to distinguish the different objects by form-ing a training triplet and the different combinations of sam-ples, which effectively boosts the discriminant ability of the proposed tracker. Beneﬁting from the above modules, our tracker possesses remarkable discriminability and ro-bustness when facing background clutters, fast motion, and occlusion, as shown in Figure 1. Experiments (details in
Section 4.1) show that our tracker achieves state-of-the-art performance on ﬁve popular tracking benchmarks, which conﬁrms the effectiveness of the proposed method.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows.
• We introduce a novel Relation Detector (RD) that is trained to obtain the ability to ﬁlter the distractors from background via few-shot learning based contrastive training strategy. Beneﬁt from RD, during the track-ing procedure, our tracker can distinguish the target in the cluttering background once given the initial state of the target without further ﬁne-tuning.
• To integrate the information obtained by RD and the classiﬁcation branch to reﬁne the tracking results, we design a Reﬁnement Module, which can jointly oper-ate the classiﬁcation and regression to localize the tar-getreducing the mismatch between those two branches.
• Our method achieves state-of-the-art results on ﬁve popular benchmarks, including VOT2018, VOT2019,
OTB100, LaSOT, and UAV123, which conﬁrms the ef-fectiveness of our proposed method. 2.