Abstract
We introduce a framework for learning from unlabeled video what is predictable in the future. Instead of commit-ting up front to features to predict, our approach learns from data which features are predictable. Based on the observa-tion that hyperbolic geometry naturally and compactly en-codes hierarchical structure, we propose a predictive model in hyperbolic space. When the model is most conﬁdent, it will predict at a concrete level of the hierarchy, but when the model is not conﬁdent, it learns to automatically select a higher level of abstraction. Experiments on two estab-lished datasets show the key role of hierarchical representa-tions for action prediction. Although our representation is trained with unlabeled video, visualizations show that ac-tion hierarchies emerge in the representation. 1.

Introduction
The future often has narrow predictability. No matter how much you study Fig. 1, you will not be able to antic-ipate the exact next action with conﬁdence. Go ahead and study it. Will they shake hands or high ﬁve?1
For the past decade, predicting the future has been a core computer vision problem [79, 31, 34, 69, 48, 54, 15, 65, 66] with a number of applications in robotics, security, and health. Since large amounts of video are available for learn-ing, the temporal structure in unlabeled video provides ex-cellent incidental supervision for learning rich representa-tions [50, 14, 38, 51, 78, 71, 61, 21, 65, 67, 13, 72, 74].
While visual prediction is challenging because it is an un-derconstrained problem, a series of results in neuroscience have revealed a biological basis in the brain for how humans anticipate outcomes in the future [35, 3, 60].
However, the central issue in computer vision has been selecting what to predict in the future. The ﬁeld has investi-gated a spectrum of options, ranging from generating pixels and motions [70, 36, 37] to forecasting activities [1, 65, 68] in the future. However, most representations are not adap-tive to the fundamental uncertainties in video. While we cannot forecast the concrete actions in Fig. 1 nor generate its motions, all hope is not lost. Instead of forecasting whether the people will high ﬁve or shake hands, there is something else predictable here. We can “hedge the bet” and predict
Figure 1: The future is often uncertain. Are they going to shake hands or high ﬁve?1 Instead of answering this question, we should
“hedge the bet” and predict the hyperonym that they will at least greet each other. In this paper, we introduce a hierarchical predic-tive model for learning what is predictable from unlabeled video. the abstraction that they will at least greet each other.
This paper introduces a framework for learning from un-labeled video what is predictable.
Instead of committing up front to a level of abstraction to predict, our approach learns from data which features are predictable. Motivated by how people organize action hierarchically [4], we pro-pose a hierarchical predictive representation. Our approach jointly learns a hierarchy of actions while also learning to anticipate at the right level of abstraction.
Our method is based on the observation that hyper-bolic geometry naturally and compactly encodes hierarchi-cal structure. Unlike Euclidean geometry, hyperbolic space can be viewed as the continuous analog of a tree [53] be-cause tree-like graphs can be embedded in ﬁnite-dimension with minimal distortion [19]. We leverage this property and learn predictive models in hyperbolic space. When the model is conﬁdent, it will predict at the concrete level of the hierarchy, but when the model is not conﬁdent, it learns to automatically select a higher-level of abstraction.
Experiments and visualizations show the pivotal role of hierarchical representations for prediction. On two estab-lished video datasets, our results show predictive hyperbolic representations are able to both recognize actions from par-tial observations as well as forecast them in the future better than baselines. Although our representation is trained with unlabeled video, visualizations also show action hierarchies
*Equal contribution 1The answer is in Season 2, Episode 16 of the The Ofﬁce. 12607
automatically emerge in the hyperbolic representation. The model explicitly represents uncertainty by trading off the speciﬁcity versus the generality of the prediction.
The primary contribution of this paper is a hierar-chical representation for visual prediction. The remain-der of this paper describes our approach and experiments in detail. Code and models are publicly available on github.com/cvlab-columbia/hyperfuture. 2.