Abstract
The recent trend in multiple object tracking (MOT) is heading towards leveraging deep learning to boost the tracking performance. However, it is not trivial to solve the data-association problem in an end-to-end fashion. In this paper, we propose a novel proposal-based learnable framework, which models MOT as a proposal generation, proposal scoring and trajectory inference paradigm on an afﬁnity graph. This framework is similar to the two-stage object detector Faster RCNN, and can solve the MOT prob-lem in a data-driven way. For proposal generation, we propose an iterative graph clustering method to reduce the computational cost while maintaining the quality of the generated proposals. For proposal scoring, we deploy a trainable graph-convolutional-network (GCN) to learn the structural patterns of the generated proposals and rank them according to the estimated quality scores. For trajec-tory inference, a simple deoverlapping strategy is adopted to generate tracking output while complying with the con-straints that no detection can be assigned to more than one track. We experimentally demonstrate that the pro-posed method achieves a clear performance improvement in both MOTA and IDF1 with respect to previous state-of-the-art on two public benchmarks. Our code is available at https://github.com/daip13/LPC_MOT.git. 1.

Introduction
Tracking multiple objects in videos is an important prob-lem in many application domains. Particularly, estimating humans location and their motion is of great interest in surveillance, business analytics, robotics and autonomous driving. Accurate and automated perception of their where-abouts and interactions with others or environment can help identifying potential illegal activities, understanding cus-tomer interactions with retail spaces, planning the pathway of robots or autonomous vehicles.
The ultimate goal of multiple object tracking (MOT) is to estimate the trajectory of each individual person as one complete trajectory over their whole presence in the scene without having any contamination by the others. Much re-search is done in this domain to design and implement ro-bust and accurate MOT algorithms in the past [7, 28, 47].
However, the problem still remains unsolved as reported in the latest results in various public benchmarks [14, 16, 18, 37]. The key challenges in MOT are mostly due to oc-clusion and scene clutter, as in any computer vision prob-lem. Consider the case when two people (yellow and purple boxes in Figure 1) are walking together in a spatial neigh-borhood. At one point, both people are visible to the camera and recent object detection algorithms like [33, 42, 43], can easily detect them. When the two people become aligned along the camera axis, however, one is fully occluded by another, and later both become visible when one passes the other. Since the visual appearance may have subtle differ-ence between the two targets due to various reasons like illumination, shading, similar clothing, etc, estimating the trajectory accurately without contamination (often called as identity transfer) remains as the key challenge.
In more crowded scenes, such occlusion can happen across multi-ple peoples which pose signiﬁcant troubles to any MOT algorithm. Moreover, the MOT problem naturally has an exponentially large search space for the solution 1 which prohibits us from using complicated mechanisms.
Traditional approaches focus on solving the problem by employing various heuristics, hand-deﬁned mechanisms to handle occlusions [8, 28]. Multiple Hypotheses Tracking (MHT [28]) is one of the earliest successful algorithms for
MOT. A key strategy in MHT to handle occlusions is to delay data-association decisions by keeping multiple hy-potheses active until data-association ambiguities are re-solved. Network ﬂow-based methods [8, 9] have recently become a standard approach for MOT due to their compu-tational efﬁciency and optimality.
In this framework, the data-association problem is modeled as a graph, where each 1The tracking-by-detection approach, which is the de-facto framework in MOT domain, needs to solve the data-association problem given detec-tions at each timestamp. The size of hypothesis space is exponential to the number of detections [28]. 2443
Figure 1. Overview of our framework. (a) Given a set of frames and detections as input. (b) A graph is constructed to model the data association problem. Nodes in the graph represent detections/tracklets and the edges indicate possible links among nodes. The nodes in different colors represent different objects. Similar to two-stage object detector faster RCNN, our method adopts a proposal-based framework. Multiple proposals (i.e., candidate object trajectories) are generated based on the afﬁnity graph. (c) We evaluate the quality scores of the generated proposals with trainable GCN. (d) A simple de-overlapping strategy is adopted to do trajectory inference and (e) obtain the ﬁnal tracking output. node represents a detection and each edge indicates a possi-ble link between nodes. Then, occlusions can be handled by connecting non-consecutive node pairs. Both MHT and net-work ﬂow-based methods need to manually design appro-priate gap-spanning afﬁnity for different scenarios. How-ever, it is infeasible to enumerate all possible challenging cases and to implement deterministic logic for each case.
In this paper, we propose a simple but surprisingly ef-fective method to solve the MOT problem in a data-driven way.
Inspired by the latest advancement in object detec-tion [43] and face clustering [57], we propose to design the
MOT algorithm using two key modules, 1) proposal gen-eration and 2) proposal scoring with graph convolutional network (GCN) [30]. Given a set of short tracklets (locally grouped set of detections using simple mechanisms), our proposal generation module (see Figure 1(b)) generates a set of proposals that contains the complete set of tracklets for fully covering each individual person, yet may as well have multiple proposals with contaminated set of tracklets (i.e., multiple different people merged into a proposal). The next step is to identify which proposal is better than the others by using a trainable GCN and rank them using the learned ranking/scoring function (see Figure 1(c)). Finally, we adopt an inference algorithm to generate tracking out-put given the rank of each proposal (see Figure 1(d)), while complying with the typical tracking constraints like no de-tection assigned to more than one track.
The main contribution of the paper is in four folds: 1)
We propose a novel learnable framework which formulates
MOT as a proposal generation, proposal scoring and trajec-tory inference pipeline. In this pipeline, we can utilize algo-rithms off the shelf for each module. 2) We propose an it-erative graph clustering strategy for proposal generation. It can signiﬁcantly reduce the computational cost while guar-anteeing the quality of the generated proposals. 3) We em-ploy a trainable GCN for proposal scoring. By directly op-timizing the whole proposal score rather than the pairwise matching cost, GCN can incorporate higher-order informa-tion within the proposal to make more accurate predictions. 4) We show signiﬁcantly improved state-of-the-art results of our method on two MOTChallenge benchmarks. 2.