Abstract specifically focusing on artistic warping.
Since its inception in 2015, Style Transfer has focused on texturing a content image using an art exemplar. Recently, the geometric changes that artists make have been acknowledged as an important component of style [42, 55, 62, 63]. Our contribution is to propose a neural network that, uniquely, learns a mapping from a 4D array of inter-feature distances to a non-parametric 2D warp field. The system is generic in not being limited by semantic class, a single learned model will suffice; all examples in this paper are output from one model.
Our approach combines the benefits of the high speed of
Liu et al. [42] with the non-parametric warping of Kim et al. [55]. Furthermore, our system extends the normal NST paradigm: although it can be used with a single exemplar, we also allow two style exemplars: one for texture and another for geometry. This supports far greater flexibility in use cases than single exemplars can provide. 1.

Introduction
Neural style transfer (NST) is a current area of research in Non-photorealistic rendering (NPR), with applications in games, artistic design, architecture, and many other fields. By mimicking a wide gamut of artistic styles from visual examples, it greatly enriches the expressiveness of digital images. To reach its fullest extent, NST must be able to mimic not just the textural elements of style that are related to (e.g., brush strokes), but geometric warps that artists use. This paper considers the problem of image stylization using deep neural networks,
NST was first proposed by Gatys et al. [15], a paper set the paradigm for a great deal of work. The algorithm receives a content image, Ic, and an artistic style exemplar, Is. These images provide the subject and rendering style for an output im-age: Io =τ(Ic,Is). The key idea is to construct a loss function of two parts, for content LC(Io,Ic) and for style LS(Io,Is).
All of NST to date define both loss functions in terms of kernel responses, typically drawn from the convolutional layers within a network. The details of how the loss functions are formed and how the network is trained largely explain the development and diversification of current NST (see Section 2 for an overview). Such diversity notwithstanding, what is common among all the techniques is that the kernel responses depend on spatial color patterns and are spatially fixed. This means that NST can be regarded as a sophisticated form of tracing over the content image, which uses texture elicited from the style image to construct the artwork.
The approach is limiting because artists change the shape of the objects they render, that is: artists use geometric warping in their work. Warping is evident across all of art, here we give just a few examples among countless others. Caricaturists, such as Ronald Searle, exaggerate semantic features in an obvious way. English landscape artist George Stubbs painted bulls to look much larger, stronger, “beefier” than in real life – a kind of caricature. In his famous “Great Wave”, Hokusai uses geometry to help emphasize natural power. Across the world, and in all times, cultures have employed geometrical distortions for expressive purpose. The art of children bears little correspondence with geometric reality, yet often remains 3702
recognizable and is always cute. Figure 1 shows two artists for whom geometric changes are an intrinsic part of their style. Picasso took full advantage of the human capacity to recognize highly distorted objects as he helped invent 20th century Western art. Surrealist artist Salvador Dali’s melting watches are instantly recognizable and attributable to him.
The importance of geometric warping is becoming recog-nized in the NST literature. Recent work has included geometric warping within an NST framework. The earliest of these are designed for single classes such as faces [63] or text [62].
Later work has provided more generic solutions [42, 55]. Our contribution is an NST architecture that performs a geometric warp and is uniquely characterized by the possession of all of the following properties:
• unlike Yaniv et al. [63] and WarpGan [52], it is not restricted to a single semantic class;
• unlike Kim et al. [55] who rely on forward and back-ward optimizations, we train a specifically designed feed-forward network to output warp fields given content and geometric images;
• warping is up-to two orders of magnitude faster than
Kim et al. [55], while producing competitive results (see
Section 4);
• unlike Liu et al. [42] who are limited to parametric warp fields, we produce a non-parametric warp;
• unlike every other NST algorithm other than Liu et al. [42], we support the use of two images to specify style, which adds versatility to image creation that is absent in other NST algorithms.
Our technique is explained in Section 3 but is easy to summarise: we warp an input image using our trained network, then apply regular NST.
To test the importance of geometric warping in human recognition of style, we performed an experiment. Details are provided in Section 4, but we summarise here. Given a style exemplar and outputs from two randomly selected NST algorithms, humans were asked to select the most similar pair, leaving the other as the odd-one-out. If neither NST algorithm used geometric warping, the style exemplar was the odd-one-out about 60% to 70% of the time, i.e., the two NST outputs were said to be more similar to one another than to the exemplar. In contrast, if one of the NST algorithms used geometric warping and the other did not, the non-warped image was odd-one-out between 60% and 70% of the time, leaving the non-warped
NST as the odd-on-out. We emphasize that all of the outputs were subject to regular NST. This result shows that geometric warping is a major contributor to style recognition by humans, in addition to textural elements. The code is available at https:
//github.com/xch-liu/learning-warp-st. 2.