Abstract
We present an efﬁcient high-resolution network, Lite-HRNet, for human pose estimation. We start by simply applying the efﬁcient shufﬂe block in ShufﬂeNet to HRNet (high-resolution network), yielding stronger performance over popular lightweight networks, such as MobileNet,
ShufﬂeNet, and Small HRNet.
We ﬁnd that the heavily-used pointwise (1 × 1) convo-lutions in shufﬂe blocks become the computational bottle-neck. We introduce a lightweight unit, conditional chan-nel weighting, to replace costly pointwise (1 × 1) convolu-tions in shufﬂe blocks. The complexity of channel weight-ing is linear w.r.t the number of channels and lower than the quadratic time complexity for pointwise convolutions.
Our solution learns the weights from all the channels and over multiple resolutions that are readily available in the parallel branches in HRNet.
It uses the weights as the bridge to exchange information across channels and res-olutions, compensating the role played by the pointwise (1 × 1) convolution. Lite-HRNet demonstrates superior re-sults on human pose estimation over popular lightweight networks. Moreover, Lite-HRNet can be easily applied to semantic segmentation task in the same lightweight man-ner. The code and models have been publicly available at https://github.com/HRNet/Lite-HRNet. 1.

Introduction
Human pose estimation requires high-resolution repre-sentation [3, 2, 26, 41] to achieve high performance. Moti-vated by the increasing demand for model efﬁciency, this paper studies the problem of developing efﬁcient high-resolution models under computation-limited resources.
Existing efﬁcient networks [5, 6, 50] are mainly designed from two perspectives. One is to borrow the design from
∗Corresponding author. This work is done when C. Yu was an intern at
Microsoft Research, Beijing, P.R. China. classiﬁcation networks, such as MobileNet [17, 16] and
ShufﬂeNet [28, 53], to reduce the redundancy in matrix-vector multiplication, where convolution operations domi-nate the cost. The other is to mediate the spatial information loss with various tricks, such as encoder-decoder architec-tures [2, 26], and multi-branch architectures [50, 55].
We ﬁrst study a naive lightweight network by simply combining the shufﬂe block in ShufﬂeNet and the high-resolution design pattern in HRNet [41]. HRNet has shown a stronger capability among large models in position-sensitive problems, e.g., semantic segmentation, human
It remains unclear pose estimation, and object detection. whether high resolution helps for small models. We empir-ically show that the direct combination outperforms Shuf-ﬂeNet, MobileNet, and Small HRNet1.
To further achieve higher efﬁciency, we introduce an efﬁ-cient unit, named conditional channel weighting, perform-ing information exchange across channels, to replace the costly pointwise (1 × 1) convolution in a shufﬂe block. The channel weighting scheme is very efﬁcient: the complex-ity is linear w.r.t the number of channels and lower than the quadratic time complexity for the pointwise convolu-tion. For example, with the multi-resolution features of 64 × 64 × 40 and 32 × 32 × 80, the conditional channel weighting unit can reduce the shufﬂe block’s whole compu-tation complexity by 80%.
Unlike the regular convolutional kernel weights learned as model parameters, the proposed scheme weights are con-ditioned on the input maps and computed across channels through a lightweight unit. Thus, they contain the in-formation in all the channel maps and serve as a bridge to exchange information through channel weighting. Fur-thermore, we compute the weights from parallel multi-resolution channel maps that are readily available HRNet so that the weights contain richer information and are strength-ened. We call the resulting network, Lite-HRNet. 1Small HRNet is available at https://github.com/HRNet/
HRNet-Semantic-Segmentation. It simply reduces the depth and the width of the original HRNet. 10440
The experimental results show that Lite-HRNet outper-forms the simple combination of shufﬂe blocks and HRNet (which we call naive Lite-HRNet). We believe that the su-periority is because the computational complexity reduction is more signiﬁcant than the loss of information exchange in the proposed conditional channel weighting scheme.
Our main contributions include:
• We simply apply the shufﬂe blocks to HRNet, lead-ing a lightweight network naive Lite-HRNet. We em-pirically show superior performance over MobileNet,
ShufﬂeNet, and Small HRNet.
• We present an improved efﬁcient network, Lite-HRNet. The key point is that we introduce an ef-ﬁcient conditional channel weighting unit to replace the costly 1 × 1 convolution in shufﬂe blocks, and the weights are computed across channels and resolutions.
• Lite-HRNet is the state-of-the-art in terms of complex-ity and accuracy trade-off on COCO and MPII human pose estimation and easily generalized to semantic seg-mentation task. 2.