Abstract
Video snapshot compressive imaging (SCI) captures a se-quence of video frames in a single shot using a 2D detector.
The underlying principle is that during one exposure time, different masks are imposed on the high-speed scene to form a compressed measurement. With the knowledge of masks, optimization algorithms or deep learning methods are employed to reconstruct the desired high-speed video frames from this snapshot measurement. Unfortunately, though these methods can achieve decent results, the long running time of optimization algorithms or huge training memory occupation of deep networks still pre-clude them in practical applications.
In this paper, we develop a memory-efﬁcient network for large-scale video
SCI based on multi-group reversible 3D convolutional neural networks.
In addition to the basic model for the grayscale SCI system, we take one step further to combine demosaicing and SCI reconstruction to directly recover color video from Bayer measurements. Extensive results on both simulation and real data captured by SCI cam-eras demonstrate that our proposed model outperforms previous state-of-the-art with less memory and thus can be used in large-scale problems. The code is at https:
//github.com/BoChenGroup/RevSCI-net. 1.

Introduction
Computational imaging (CI) [1, 34] introduces modu-lation (coding) in the optical path to advance the capabil-ity of traditional cameras. Snapshot compressive imaging (SCI) [11, 25, 40, 43, 51] is a promising CI technique that indirectly captures 3-dimensional (3D) data using a 2D de-tector, i.e., the original 3-dimensional data (videos or hy-* Corresponding authors.
Figure 1. Principle of grayscale or color video SCI system. The original scene is modulated by dynamic masks and then is inte-grated by the camera to obtain a snapshot measurement. Note that for the color video SCI system, the camera captures the modulated scene through the Bayer-ﬁlter not directly collecting the bright-ness. Having obtained measurements, the reconstruction algo-rithm recovers the desired video from it. perspectral images) are coded by different masks and then integrated into a single frame (measurement). As shown in
Fig. 1, in video SCI, the temporal dimension is modulated and compressed, which avoids large memory storage and transmission bandwidth during imaging. To make the SCI system practical, an efﬁcient reconstruction algorithm, i.e., recovering the desired images from the compressed mea-surement is critical. In this work, we focus on the practical video SCI reconstruction algorithm that can scale to large data.
The mainstream of reconstruction methods is the model-based optimization problems with various prior knowl-edge, e.g., total variation (TV) used in GAP-TV [50] and
TwIST [2], and non-local low-rank [9] used in DeSCI [24].
These methods can provide usable results in an unsuper-vised manner but cannot balance the reconstruction quality and speed (hours for DeSCI to reconstruct a 256 × 256 × 8 video from a single measurement), which makes them un-16246
Figure 2. Reconstruction results using the proposed RevSCI-net on large scale (512×512×50) real data captured by [39]. Note that this is the ﬁrst deep learning model can perform a compression rate at B=50. Videos are shown in the supplementary material (SM). realistic for real applications.
Inspired by deep learning and rich datasets, some researchers develop deep neural networks (DNNs) [4, 13, 33, 39, 47] or combine DNN with optimization methods, such as deep unfolding tech-nique [21, 27, 30] and plug-and-play algorithms [52, 56], to reconstruct desired 3D data from SCI measurements. Bene-ﬁting from the efﬁcient feed forward networks, DNN-based algorithms signiﬁcantly decrease the inference time to less than one second. Most recently, BIRNAT [4], which de-velops a bidirectional recurrent neural network, has led to state-of-the-art reconstruction results. Most researches on video SCI reconstruction usually verify the performance on a low-resolution situation (less than 512 × 512). With the high-resolution images widely used in our daily life (HD with 1280 × 720 and FHD with 1920 × 1080), however, the squarely increasing pixels will signiﬁcantly increase the running time and training memory consumption for DNNs.
Although some methods can provide superior reconstruc-tions, e.g., DeSCI and BIRNAT, unpractical running time or GPU memory consumption still precludes them in the practical large-scale SCI system applications.
Bearing the above concerns in mind, in this paper, we propose an end-to-end reversible 3D convolutional neural network (CNN) for SCI reconstruction named RevSCI-net, in which 3D convolutional kernel jointly explores the spa-tial and temporal correlation within the desired data. Mean-while, the reversible structure allows activations not to be stored in memory. The main contributions of our work are summarized as follows:
• Since the desired signal of video SCI is 3D, we build an end-to-end 3D CNN paradigm for video SCI recon-struction which jointly explores the spatial and tempo-ral correlation of video frames by the 3D convolutional kernel. To our best knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time that 3D CNN is applied in SCI problems.
• We propose the multi-channel reversible CNN in the proposed network with less memory occupation during training. Beneﬁt by this, we can reconstruct a 512 × 512 × 50 video from a snapshot measurement, with an example shown in Fig. 2, where a compression rate of 50 is achieved. This is the ﬁrst deep learning results that accomplish this high spatio-temporal resolution.
• We combine SCI reconstruction and demosaicing for color SCI systems into a single end-to-end network.
• In addition to the widely used grayscale test sets, we also conduct simulation on large-scale color datasets.
Furthermore, we verify the proposed network on the real data (captured by SCI cameras). Only our model can recover large scale and high compression rate SCI measurements compared with other DNN based meth-ods thanks to the memory-efﬁcient structure.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Sec. 2 brieﬂy reviews the related work. Sec. 3 presents the math-ematical model of video SCI. Sec. 4 details our proposed model for grayscale and color video SCI reconstruction.
Sec. 5 presents extensive results including simulation and real data. Sec. 6 concludes the entire paper. 2.