Abstract
To capture high-speed videos using a two-dimensional detector, video snapshot compressive imaging (SCI) is a promising system, where the video frames are coded by dif-ferent masks and then compressed to a snapshot measure-ment. Following this, efﬁcient algorithms are desired to re-construct the high-speed frames, where the state-of-the-art results are achieved by deep learning networks. However, these networks are usually trained for speciﬁc small-scale masks and often have high demands of training time and
GPU memory, which are hence not ﬂexible to i) a new mask with the same size and ii) a larger-scale mask. We address these challenges by developing a Meta Modulated Convo-lutional Network for SCI reconstruction, dubbed MetaSCI.
MetaSCI is composed of a shared backbone for different masks, and light-weight meta-modulation parameters to evolve to different modulation parameters for each mask, thus having the properties of fast adaptation to new masks (or systems) and ready to scale to large data. Extensive sim-ulation and real data results demonstrate the superior per-formance of our proposed approach. Our code is available at https://github.com/xyvirtualgroup/MetaSCI-CVPR2021. 1.

Introduction
High-speed video imaging system is desirable in our daily life, which often faces challenges in capturing and saving high-dimensional (HD) data, e.g., high memory, bandwidth and power demand.
Inspired by compressive sensing (CS) [2, 5] techniques, video snapshot compres-sive imaging (SCI) has attracted much attention, which en-joys the advantages of low memory, low bandwidth, low power and potentially low cost [40]. The video SCI sys-tem constructs a pipeline of an optical hardware encoder and a software decoder [39].
In one exposure time, the optical encoder modulates the HD data via dynamic masks and then compresses multiple high-speed frames into a two-dimensional (2D) snapshot measurement. The decoder, on the other hand, aims to recover or reconstruct the high-†Equal contributions.
* Corresponding authors. (a) Adaptation to a new mask (b) MetaSCI for large-scale SCI reconstruction by fast adaptation
Figure 1: Illustration of the fast adaptation property of MetaSCI, as training on 256 × 256 measurements and adapted to (a) a new 256 × 256 measurement compressed by different masks, and (b) a 768 × 1792 measurement compressed by large masks. The results in (a) is evaluated on a benchmark data, Kobe [15]. Compared with BIRNAT [4], a SOTA deep model, MetaSCI realizes much faster adaptation. In (b), we decompose the large-scale SCI re-construction task into 21 sub-tasks without overlap. MetaSCI is trained on 4 sub-tasks, and then fast adapted to the others. After the adaptation stage, MetaSCI can realize real-time reconstruction using feed-forward mapping. By contrast, PnP [40] and GAP-TV
[38], the only two existing methods suitable for large-scale SCI, need iterative optimization for every measurement. speed video frames using advanced algorithms. This paper focuses on video SCI reconstruction. More speciﬁcally, we develop a fast adaptive decoder motivated by meta learn-ing, which is ﬂexible to different systems and ready to scale to large data. 2083
In general, a desirable decoder should have good proper-ties in i) high ﬁdelity (often with PSNR ≥30dB) and ii) fast recovery. With more than a decade of development, more and more optical encoders are constructed [9, 16, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 41, 42], which arouses more considera-tions for a practical algorithm. As a new encoding system is built, one may often wonder whether a well learned decoder can be fast adapted to this new encoder. A relatively sim-ple scenario is that the physical masks are changed but with the same spatial size such as 256 × 256 pixels. Even more challenging, the physical masks are scaled to higher spa-tial dimension such as 512 × 512 or even up to 2048 × 2048 pixels when a high resolution system is built. Therefore, the properties of iii) fast adaptation and iv) scalability are also desired to make video SCI system being practical. How-ever, existing SCI reconstruction networks often lack fast adaptation, i.e., not ﬂexible. As the mask changes, the net-work has to be re-trained, which again needs a long time, as shown in Fig. 1a.
Bearing all these four-aspect concerns in mind, we pro-pose a meta modulated convolutional network for ﬂexi-ble SCI reconstruction, dubbed MetaSCI. With the follow-ing contributions and appealing properties, MetaSCI will pave the way of applying deep learning methods to large-scale SCI in our daily life.
• We discuss the fast adaptation problem of video SCI in real applications, which have not been studied before, es-pecially for deep learning models.
• To realize fast adaptation, we propose a multi-encoding-system training regime and build MetaSCI. MetaSCI con-sists of a shared backbone for different systems, and light-weight meta-modulation parameters that can evolve to different modulation parameters for each individual system.
• A hybrid learning algorithm is developed to train the net-work, with standard gradient descend for the shared back-bone and meta updates for meta parameters.
• Besides achieving competing performance and fast adap-tation on widely used small-scale video benchmarks, us-ing the attractive property of fast adaptation, MetaSCI is the ﬁrst deep model to perform real-time large-scale video reconstruction as shown in Fig. 1b. 2.