Abstract
Despite recent progress in depth sensing and 3D recon-struction, mirror surfaces are a signiﬁcant source of errors.
To address this problem, we create the Mirror3D dataset: a 3D mirror plane dataset based on three RGBD datasets (Matterpot3D, NYUv2 and ScanNet) containing 7,011 mir-ror instance masks and 3D planes. We then develop Mir-ror3DNet: a module that reﬁnes raw sensor depth or esti-mated depth to correct errors on mirror surfaces. Our key idea is to estimate the 3D mirror plane based on RGB input and surrounding depth context, and use this estimate to di-rectly regress mirror surface depth. Our experiments show that Mirror3DNet signiﬁcantly mitigates errors from a va-riety of input depth data, including raw sensor depth and depth estimation or completion methods. 1.

Introduction
Recent years have seen much progress in 3D recon-It is now possible to acquire 3D re-struction methods. constructions of interiors with high quality geometry and texture. However, these reconstructions fail spectacularly when used in environments with mirrors and glass, both of which are prevalent in indoor spaces.
The fragility of many reconstruction methods is due to a reliance on accurate active depth sensing. Commodity sensors such as the Microsoft Kinect and Intel RealSense employ active infrared or time of ﬂight depth sensing which requires strong signal return from sensed surfaces. Unfor-tunately, highly glossy and reﬂective surfaces such as mir-rors cause either no signal return or highly unreliable depth estimates. Though it may seem that reﬂectors are a ‘cor-ner case’ with few affected pixels, the resulting errors are catastrophic to reconstruction algorithms, leading to loss of camera pose tracking and geometry artifacts (see Figure 1).
Recently, Whelan et al. [34] demonstrated that by de-tecting mirror planes it is possible to mitigate the above is-sues and achieve high-quality reconstructions in scenes with many reﬂectors. However, their method relies on the use of an AprilTag [27] attached to a custom camera rig. The use of such custom hardware is not always feasible. In this 15990
paper, we propose a method for identifying mirrors and es-timating mirror surface depth on RGBD data collected with commodity hardware.
Our key idea is to identify mirror regions based on color information (RGB), model the mirror as a plane and use an estimated mirror normal and information from the mir-ror’s surroundings to predict the mirror’s position in 3D.
Our work is related to the recently proposed task of mirror segmentation in 2D [21, 38]. However, we operate in 3D and focus on using 3D mirror plane estimates to improve the reliability of depth data.
To estimate the prevalence of mirrors in 3D environ-ments and understand the severity of the above reconstruc-tion issues, we ﬁrst annotate 3D mirror planes in three pop-ular RGBD datasets: Matterport3D [6], ScanNet [7], and
NYUv2 [32]. These annotations create ‘true’ ground truth for observed mirror surfaces that was previously unavail-able. We ﬁnd the prominence of mirrors varies between datasets depending on their acquisition procedure, leading to a corresponding range of depth data issues and recon-struction failures. Using this data, we introduce the task of 3D mirror detection from RGB and RGBD data, and es-tablish initial benchmark results by: i) applying state-of-the-art depth estimation and depth completion approaches to directly estimate mirror depth values; and ii) propose a simple architecture combining a MaskRCNN [14] module and a PlaneRCNN [23] module to segment mirror surfaces, estimate mirror 3D planes and reﬁne mirror surface depth estimates. Overall, we make the following contributions:
• Introduce the task of 3D mirror plane prediction from single-view RGB and RGBD data
• Provide 3D mirror plane annotations for three RGBD datasets (Matterport3D, NYUv2 and ScanNet)
• Establish benchmarks for RGB and RGBD-based 3D mirror plane prediction, and evaluate depth completion and depth estimation approaches on the task
• Present Mirror3DNet, an architecture that predicts a 3D mirror normal and mirror segmentation to reﬁne raw sensor depth or the output of state-of-the-art depth completion and estimation methods 2.