Abstract
Face recognition is known to exhibit bias - subjects in a certain demographic group can be better recognized than other groups. This work aims to learn a fair face representa-tion, where faces of every group could be more equally rep-resented. Our proposed group adaptive classiﬁer mitigates bias by using adaptive convolution kernels and attention mechanisms on faces based on their demographic attributes.
The adaptive module comprises kernel masks and channel-wise attention maps for each demographic group so as to activate different facial regions for identiﬁcation, leading to more discriminative features pertinent to their demographics.
Our introduced automated adaptation strategy determines whether to apply adaptation to a certain layer by iteratively computing the dissimilarity among demographic-adaptive parameters. A new de-biasing loss function is proposed to mitigate the gap of average intra-class distance between de-mographic groups. Experiments on face benchmarks (RFW,
LFW, IJB-A, and IJB-C) show that our work is able to miti-gate face recognition bias across demographic groups while maintaining the competitive accuracy. 1.

Introduction
Face recognition (FR) systems are known to ex-hibit discriminatory behaviors against certain demographic groups [21, 28, 40]. The 2019 NIST Face Recognition Ven-dor Test [21] shows that all 106 tested FR algorithms exhibit varying biased performances on gender, race, and age groups of a mugshot dataset. Deploying biased FR systems to law enforcement is potentially unethical [11]. Given the im-plication of automated FR-driven decisions, it is crucial to develop fair and unbiased FR systems to avoid the negative societal impact. Note that, differ from the inductive bias in machine learning [15], we deﬁne FR bias as the uneven recognition performance w.r.t. demographic groups.
State-of-the-art (SOTA) FR algorithms [13, 33, 34, 48, 69, 70] rely on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) trained on large-scale face datasets. Biases in data are transmitted (a) (b)
Figure 1: (a) Our proposed group adaptive classiﬁer (GAC) auto-matically chooses between non-adaptive (“N”) and adaptive (“A”) layer in a multi-layer network, where the latter uses demographic-group-speciﬁc kernel and attention. (b) Compared to the baseline with the 50-layer ArcFace backbone, GAC improves face veriﬁ-cation accuracy in most groups of RFW dataset [72], especially under-represented groups, leading to mitigated FR bias, e.g., GAC reduces biasness from 1.11 to 0.60. to the FR models through network learning. For example, to minimize the overall loss, a network tends to learn a better representation for faces in the majority group whose data dominate the training set, resulting in unequal discriminabil-ities. However, the imbalanced demographic distribution of face data is not the only trigger of FR bias. Prior works have shown that even using a demographic balanced dataset [71] or training separate classiﬁers for each group [40], the per-formance on some groups is still inferior to the others. By studying non-trainable FR algorithms, [40] introduced the notion of inherent bias, i.e., certain groups are inherently more susceptible to errors in face matching.
To tackle the dataset-induced bias, traditional methods re-weight either the data proportions [6] or cost values [1].
Such methods are limited when applied to large-scale imbal-anced datasets. Recent imbalance learning methods focus on novel objective functions for class-skewed datasets. For instance, Dong et al. [18] propose a Class Rectiﬁcation Loss to incrementally optimize on hard samples of the classes with under-represented attributes. Alternatively, researchers strengthen the decision boundary to impede perturbation from other classes by enforcing margins between hard clus-ters via adaptive clustering [31], or between rare classes via
Bayesian uncertainty estimates [38]. To adapt the aforemen-tioned methods to racial bias mitigation, Wang et al. [71] 3414
modify the large margin based loss functions by reinforce-ment learning. However, [71] requires two auxiliary net-works, an ofﬂine sampling network and a deep Q-learning network, to generate adaptive margin policy for training the
FR network, which hinders the learning efﬁciency.
To mitigate FR bias, our main idea is to optimize the face representation learning on every demographic group in a sin-gle network, despite demographically imbalanced training data. Conceptually, we may categorize face features into two types of patterns: general pattern is shared by all faces; dif-ferential pattern is relevant to demographic attributes. When the differential pattern of one speciﬁc demographic group dominates training data, the network learns to predict iden-tities mainly based on that pattern as it is more convenient to minimize the loss than using other patterns, leading to bias towards that speciﬁc group. One mitigation is to give the network more capacity to broaden its scope for multiple face patterns from different groups. An unbiased FR model shall rely on both unique patterns for recognition of differ-ent groups, and general patterns of all faces for improved generalizability. Accordingly, as in Fig. 1, we propose a group adaptive classiﬁer (GAC) to explicitly learn these different feature patterns. GAC includes two modules: the adaptive layer and automation module. The adaptive layer comprises adaptive convolution kernels and channel-wise attention maps where each kernel and map tackle faces in one demographic group. We also introduce a new objective function to GAC, which diminishes the variation of average intra-class distance between demographic groups.
Prior work on dynamic CNNs introduce adaptive convolu-tions to either every layer [36, 73, 79], or manually speciﬁed layers [27, 51, 67]. In contrast, we propose an automation module to choose which layers to apply adaptations. As we observed, not all convolutional layers require adaptive kernels for bias mitigation (see Fig. 4a). At any layer of
GAC, only kernels expressing high dissimilarity are consid-ered as demographic-adaptive kernels. For those with low dissimilarity, their average kernel is shared by all inputs in that layer. Thus, the proposed network progressively learns to select the optimal structure for the demographic-adaptive learning. Both non-adaptive layers with shared kernels and adaptive layers are jointly learned in a uniﬁed network.
The contributions of this work include:
• A new face recognition algorithm that reduces demo-graphic bias and tailors representations for faces in every demographic group by adopting adaptive convo-lutions and attention techniques;
• A new adaptation mechanism that automatically de-termines the layers to employ dynamic kernels and attention maps;
• The proposed method achieves SOTA performance on a demographic-balanced dataset and three benchmarks. 2.