Abstract
Recent advances in geometric deep-learning introduce complex computational challenges for evaluating the dis-tance between meshes. From a mesh model, point clouds are necessary along with a robust distance metric to as-sess surface quality or as part of the loss function for train-ing models. Current methods often rely on a uniform ran-dom mesh discretization, which yields irregular sampling and noisy distance estimation. In this paper we introduce
MongeNet, a fast and optimal transport based sampler that allows for an accurate discretization of a mesh with bet-ter approximation properties. We compare our method to the ubiquitous random uniform sampling and show that the approximation error is almost half with a very small com-putational overhead. 1.

Introduction
Recently, computer vision researchers have demon-strated an increasing interest in developing deep learning models for 3D data understanding [42, 5]. As successful applications of those models, we can mention single view object shape reconstruction [45, 14], shape and pose estima-tion [22], point cloud completion and approximation [16], and brain cortical surface reconstruction [38].
A ubiquitous and important component of these 3D deep learning models is the computation of distances between the predicted and ground-truth meshes either for loss com-putation during training or quality metric calculations for evaluation. In essence, the mainstream approach relies on sampling point clouds from any given meshes to be able to compute point-based distances such as the Chamfer dis-tance [3] or earth mover’s distance [37]. While there ex-ist in-depth discussions about these distance metrics in the literature [13, 27], the mesh sampling technique itself re-mains uncharted, where the uniform sampling approach is widely adopted by most of the 3D deep learning models
[45, 31, 14]. This approach is computationally efﬁcient and is the only mesh sampling method available in exist-ing 3D deep learning libraries like PyTorch3D [35] and
Kaolin [19]. However, it does not approximate the under-lying surface accurately since it produces a clustering of points (clamping) along the surface resulting in large under-sampled areas and spurious artifacts for ﬂat surfaces. For instance, Figure 1 shows that the Voronoi Tessellation for uniform sampled points is distributed irregularly, while Fig-ure 2 highlights sampling artifacts in the tail and wings of an airplane from ShapeNet.
In this paper, we revisit the mesh sampling problem and propose a novel algorithm to sample point clouds from tri-angular meshes. We formulate this problem as an optimal transport problem between simplexes and discrete Dirac measures to compute the optimal solution. Due to the com-16664
Figure 2: Plane of the ShapeNet dataset sampled with 5k points. Left: Point cloud produced by MongeNet. Right: Point cloud produced by the random uniform sampler. Note the clamping pattern across the mesh produced by the random uniform sampling approach. putational challenge of this algorithm, we train a neural net-work, named MongeNet, to predict its solution efﬁciently.
As such, MongeNet can be adopted as a mesh sampler during training or testing of 3D deep learning models pro-viding a better representation of the underlying mesh. As shown in Figure 1, MongeNet sampled points result in uni-form Voronoi cell areas which better approximate the under-lying mesh surfaces without producing sampling artifacts (also exempliﬁed in Figure 2).
To evaluate our approach, we ﬁrst compare the proposed sampling technique to existing methods, especially those within the computer graphics community. We show that our sampling scheme better approximates triangles for a re-duced number of sampled points. Then, we evaluate the usefulness of MongeNet on 3D deep learning tasks as a mesh approximator to input point clouds using the state-of-the-art Point2Mesh model [16]. To conduct an in-depth analysis of our results, we detail why our method is per-forming better in the computation of the distance between two point clouds stemming from the same object surface.
In all tasks, the proposed approach is more robust, reliable, and better approximates the target surface when compared to the widely used uniform mesh sampling technique. We demonstrate a signiﬁcant reduction in approximation error by a factor of 1.89 for results computed on the ShapeNet dataset. 2.