Abstract
In many real-world applications, the relative depth of ob-jects in an image is crucial for scene understanding. Recent approaches mainly tackle the problem of depth prediction in monocular images by treating the problem as a regres-sion task. Yet, being interested in an order relation in the
ﬁrst place, ranking methods suggest themselves as a natural alternative to regression, and indeed, ranking approaches leveraging pairwise comparisons as training information (“object A is closer to the camera than B”) have shown promising performance on this problem. In this paper, we elaborate on the use of so-called listwise ranking as a gener-alization of the pairwise approach. Our method is based on the Plackett-Luce (PL) model, a probability distribution on rankings, which we combine with a state-of-the-art neural network architecture and a simple sampling strategy to re-duce training complexity. Moreover, taking advantage of the representation of PL as a random utility model, the proposed predictor offers a natural way to recover (shift-invariant) metric depth information from ranking-only data provided at training time. An empirical evaluation on several bench-mark datasets in a “zero-shot” setting demonstrates the effectiveness of our approach compared to existing ranking and regression methods. 1.

Introduction
Estimating depth in monocular images constitutes a prob-lem of practical importance when aiming to understand the geometry of a scene, e.g., in autonomous driving systems or for augmented reality applications. Due to its ill-posed nature, methods approaching this problem nowadays typi-cally incorporate complex models, trained on large amounts
*Corresponding author: julian.lienen@upb.de. of data using machine learning methods.
The majority of existing approaches tackles depth es-timation (whether per-pixel or per-object) as a regression problem, i.e., as the problem of learning a model to predict a (pseudo-)metric map (e.g., [1, 9, 17, 18]). However, on the one hand, accurate prediction of metric depth actually depends on the intrinsic camera parameters, which are often not available. On the other hand, instead of predicting abso-lute depth, it is often enough to predict the relative depth of pixels or higher level concepts (such as objects), that is, to sort them from closest to farthest away from the camera.
One may then argue that regression is solving an un-necessarily difﬁcult task, and rather advocate a formaliza-tion of depth estimation as a ranking task [12]. So-called
“learning-to-rank” methods can be used to minimize suitable performance metrics based on relative errors. As absolute depth measurements are not necessarily needed, ranking has the additional advantage that it potentially allows for learning from weaker training information. This includes depth annotations that are not metric but can be regarded as pseudo-metric data, e.g., disparity maps constructed from stereo images or videos [6, 14, 20], or human-annotated data
[5, 7]. Without the need for metric RGB-D data produced by depth sensors, the diversity of training datasets can be drastically increased due to cheaper data acquisition [33].
Existing ranking methods are essentially based on pair-wise comparisons of the form “object A is closer to the cam-era than B” [5, 33, 34, 35]. Pairwise relations of that kind are sampled from a depth map as training information, and pre-dictive models are induced by minimizing pairwise ranking losses. While these approaches have proven effective, the quadratic number of possible pairs that can be constructed renders them rather inefﬁcient and necessitates sophisticated sampling strategies to eliminate less informative pairs [34].
Besides, breaking a linear order into pairwise comparisons necessarily comes with a certain loss of information. In par-14595
ticular, information about the transitivity of order relations, which is implicitly contained in a linear order, will be lost.
To avoid these drawbacks, so-called “listwise ranking”
[32] has been proposed as an alternative to pairwise meth-ods. In the listwise approach, higher order rankings of arbi-trary length can be considered as training information. In this paper, we elaborate on the use of listwise ranking for depth estimation in images. More speciﬁcally, we propose a listwise ranking method based on the well-known Plackett-Luce (PL) model [22, 24], which allows for learning proba-bility distributions over rankings from pseudo-metric data.
Moreover, taking advantage of the representation of PL as a random utility model [27], we suggest a natural way to re-cover translation-invariant approximations of the underlying metric depth information. Along with that, we propose a state-of-the-art neural network architecture as a backbone, together with a simple sampling strategy to construct training examples from raw pseudo-depth data.
In a zero-shot evaluation, where we compare models on data not considered for training, we study the cross-dataset performance of our model and compare it with state-of-the-art approaches. Thereby, we demonstrate that listwise rank-ing is an effective approach for rank-based error minimiza-tion, and our model constitutes an appropriate choice for the prediction of depth orders in unseen scenes, as well as providing promising results in recovering metric depth. 2.