Abstract
Over the past few years, the ﬁeld of scene text detec-tion has progressed rapidly that modern text detectors are able to hunt text in various challenging scenarios. How-ever, they might still fall short when handling text instances of extreme aspect ratios and varying scales. To tackle such difﬁculties, we propose in this paper a new algorithm for scene text detection, which puts forward a set of strate-gies to signiﬁcantly improve the quality of text localiza-tion. Speciﬁcally, a Text Feature Alignment Module (TFAM) is proposed to dynamically adjust the receptive ﬁelds of features based on initial raw detections; a Position-Aware
Non-Maximum Suppression (PA-NMS) module is devised to selectively concentrate on reliable raw detections and ex-clude unreliable ones; besides, we propose an Instance-wise IoU loss for balanced training to deal with text in-stances of different scales. An extensive ablation study demonstrates the effectiveness and superiority of the pro-posed strategies. The resulting text detection system, which integrates the proposed strategies with a leading scene text detector EAST, achieves state-of-the-art or competitive per-formance on various standard benchmarks for text detection while keeping a fast running speed. 1.

Introduction
Recently, scene text reading has become an active re-search topic in the computer vision community, due to the vital value in a wide range of applications, such as video indexing, signboard reading [25], and instant trans-lation, which requires automatic textual information extrac-tion from natural images.
Driven by deep neural networks and massive data, tech-niques and systems for scene text reading have evolved drastically over the past few years and numerous inspiring
*Equal Contribution
†Corresponding author (a) (c) (b) (d)
Figure 1. Illustration of the superiority of the proposed MOST in handling long text instances. (a) and (b) are from EAST [45]; (c) and (d) are from MOST. (a) and (c) show raw detection boxes pre-dicted at 3 different locations inside the text region. The sampling point shares the same color with the corresponding detection box. (b) and (d) are the ﬁnal detection results. ideas have been proposed [20]. However, on account of real-world challenges such as diverse shapes, arbitrary ori-entations, various scales as well as complex illumination, severe blur, and perspective distortion, there is still large room for improvement of current text reading methods.
In particular, regarding scene text detection, the topic we are concerned with in this work, obvious weaknesses of ex-isting algorithms can be observed. For instance, EAST [45], a representative one-stage scene text detector, has proven to be poor at detecting text instances with extreme aspect ra-tios (see Fig. 1 (a) and (b)). There are two main reasons: (1) The network has a limited receptive ﬁeld and thus is in-capable of making use of sufﬁcient information needed to precisely predict the spatial extent of long text instances; (2) In the Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) procedure of
EAST, the detections are merged using their text/non-text classiﬁcation scores as weight, which neglects their differ-ences in quality caused by the network’s limited receptive
ﬁeld and leads to biased geometric estimation.
To address these issues, we propose a Multi-Oriented
Scene Text detector (MOST) with localization reﬁnement. 8813
The localization reﬁnement part includes a Text Feature
Alignment Module (TFAM) and a Position-Aware Non-Maximum Suppression (PA-NMS) module. The former aligns image features with the coarse detection results, which can dynamically adjust the receptive ﬁeld for the lo-calization prediction layer. The latter, on the other hand, adaptively merges the raw detections according to the posi-tions at which they are predicted to focus on accurate pre-dictions while abandoning inaccurate ones. Moreover, to improve the detection of small text instances, we design an
Instance-wise IoU loss, which keeps the weight of each in-stance in the loss function the same.
The experiments demonstrate that the three proposed strategies can effectively enhance the detection perfor-mance. Speciﬁcally, they bring 4.0% and 9.5% perfor-mance gain on the MLT17 validation set for different
IoU standards and 5.1% improvement on the MTWI test dataset. Moreover, our proposed text detector keeps a sim-ple pipeline and runs quite fast.
The contributions of this paper are four-fold: 1. We propose TFAM, which dynamically adjusts the re-ceptive ﬁeld based on the coarse detections. 2. The proposed PA-NMS further reﬁnes the detections by merging reliable predictions based on the positions. 3. We introduce the Instance-wise IoU loss to strike a bal-anced training of text instances of different scales. 4. Our proposed MOST achieves state-of-the-art or com-petitive performance and a fast inference speed. 2.