Abstract
High-quality high-resolution (HR) magnetic resonance (MR) images afford more detailed information for reliable diagnosis and quantitative image analyses. Deep convolu-tional neural networks (CNNs) have shown promising abil-ity for MR image super-resolution (SR) given low-resolution (LR) MR images. The LR MR images usually share some vi-sual characteristics: repeating patterns, relatively simpler structures, and less informative background. Most previous
CNN-based SR methods treat the spatial pixels (including the background) equally. They also fail to sense the entire space of the input, which is critical for high-quality MR im-age SR. To address those problems, we propose squeeze and excitation reasoning attention networks (SERAN) for accu-rate MR image SR. We propose to squeeze attention from global spatial information of the input and obtain global descriptors. Such global descriptors enhance the network’s ability to focus on more informative regions and structures in MR images. We further build relationship among those global descriptors and propose primitive relationship rea-soning attention. The global descriptors are further reﬁned with learned attention. To fully make use of the aggregated information, we adaptively recalibrate feature responses with learned adaptive attention vectors. These attention vectors select a subset of global descriptors to complement each spatial location for accurate details and texture recon-struction. We propose squeeze and excitation attention with residual scaling, which not only stabilizes the training but also makes it ﬂexible to other basic networks. Extensive ex-periments show the effectiveness of our proposed SERAN, which clearly surpasses state-of-the-art methods on bench-marks quantitatively and visually. 1.

Introduction
Bicubic
IDN
RDN
Ours
Ground Truth
Figure 1. The visual comparison between the our method and re-cent image SR methods on a PD image with scaling factor ×4. beneﬁt accurate diagnosis and quantitative image analy-ses [5]. However, in real-world cases, HR MR images are obtained at the cost of longer scanning time, lower signal-to-noise ratio, and smaller spatial converge [32]. Im-age super-resolution (SR) reconstructs HR outputs from the given low-resolution (LR) ones. It is becoming a promising technique to upscale the spatial resolution of MR images.
Recently, deep convolutional neural network (CNN) has shown its powerful ability for high-quality image SR. Dong et al. ﬁrstly introduced CNN for image SR in SRCNN [7,8], which has only three convolutional layers. Kim et al. in-creased the network depth by utilizing residual learning in
VDSR [18]. Hui et al. proposed information distillation network (IDN) [15]. Zhang et al. achieved better SR per-formance with RDN [48], which fully utilizes hierarchical features. On the other hand, some MR images oriented SR methods were also proposed. Chen et al. used 3D dense network and adversarial learning for MR image SR [5].
High-resolution (HR) magnetic resonance (MR) images would provide more detailed structures and textures, which
However, those deep CNN based methods either neglect the characteristics of MR images or suffer from intrinsic 13425
Attention Maps M
Attention Vector D
Squeeze (cid:104)
PRR (cid:104)
Excitation (cid:711)
Input E
Global Descriptors V
Enhanced Descriptors V*
Output Z
Figure 2. A brief illustration of our squeeze and excitation attention mechanism. Similar to [3], the global features are ﬁrst collected via bilinear pooling and then distributed to each spatial position by considering the corresponding local feature. However, we enhance the global features through primitive relationship reasoning (PRR), as described in the text. drawbacks. First, MR images often have repeating struc-tural patterns and are relatively simpler than natural images.
Very wide and deep networks (e.g., EDSR [26]) may suf-fer from over-ﬁtting problem. Second, MR images often contain large region of background, which is far less infor-mative than the target structural regions. However, most previous CNN based methods treat all the spatial pixels of the image equally. They cannot distinguish target and back-ground regions, hindering the representation ability. Third, most previous CNN based SR methods depend on convolu-tional operations, which focus on local neighborhoods and fail to capture the entire aspects of the input. However, it’s important for MR images to sense the global features, which contribute to reconstruct more informative regions.
To tackle these issues and limitations, we propose squeeze and excitation attention networks (SERAN) for ac-curate MR image SR (see Fig. 1). As illustrated in Fig. 2, we propose to squeeze global spatial information into global descriptors with second-order attention pooling operation.
It allows the model to focus on more informative regions and structures in MR images. We then build the relationship among primitives and apply graph convolutional network (GCN) to perform reasoning and obtain primitive relation-ship reasoning attention. We reﬁne the global descriptors with the learned attention. To fully utilize the aggregated in-formation, we adaptively recalibrate feature responses with learned adaptive attention vectors. These attention vectors select a subset of global descriptors to complement each spatial location for accurate details and texture reconstruc-tion. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our SERAN, when compared with recent methods.
In summary, the main contributions of this work are:
• We propose the squeeze and excitation reasoning at-tention network (SERAN) for fast and accurate MR image super-resolution (SR). To our best knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work investigating semantic reasoning attention to MR image SR.
• We propose to collect global visual primitives from the features. We further propose primitive relationship reasoning attention for reﬁnement. We then adaptively allocate the global visual primitives to local feature.
• We demonstrate the effectiveness of our SERAN with extensive experiments on benchmark datasets. Our
SERAN achieves signiﬁcant performance gain over other state-of-the-art image SR methods. 2.