Abstract
This paper presents a surface normal integration method that solves an inverse problem of local plane ﬁtting. Sur-face reconstruction from normal maps is essential in pho-tometric shape reconstruction. To this end, we formulate normal integration in the camera coordinates and jointly solve for 3D point positions and local plane displacements.
Unlike existing methods that consider the vertical distances between 3D points, we minimize the sum of squared point-to-plane distances. Our method can deal with both ortho-graphic or perspective normal maps with arbitrary bound-aries. Compared to existing normal integration methods, our method avoids the checkerboard artifact and performs more robustly against natural boundaries, sharp features, and outliers. We further provide a geometric analysis of the source of artifacts that appear in previous methods based on our plane ﬁtting formulation. Experimental results on ana-lytically computed, synthetic, and real-world surfaces show that our method yields accurate and stable reconstruction for both orthographic and perspective normal maps1. 1.

Introduction
Reconstructing a surface from its surface normal map, a problem called normal integration [28], is essential for photometric 3D reconstruction, such as shape from shad-ing [19], photometric stereo [34], and shape from polar-ization [20]. Among all approaches to normal integra-tion, variational-based methods have been studied for many years [14, 16, 28], which are based on functional optimiza-tion. The objectives are turned into linear systems by ei-ther discretizing the functional itself [14] or its optimal condition [28, 29] in the form of discrete Poisson’s equa-tion. Recently, a non-variational approach based on dis-crete geometry processing (DGP) [37] was proposed for normal integration. DGP also solves a linear system to esti-mate the surface. For all the three linear systems, however, 1Source is hoshino042/NormalIntegration. available code at https : / / github . com /
Functional [14]
Poisson [29]
DGP [37]
Our reconstruction
Figure 1. (Top) Typical problems in solving the linear systems for normal integration. From left to right: The checkerboard artifact,
Gibbs phenomenon near sharp features, and sensitivity to outliers. (Bottom) Our results from the same normal maps as above. There is no checkerboard artifact, Gibbs phenomenon almost disappears, and outliers hardly distort the surface. their least squares approximate solutions suffer from several problems. For discrete functional, a checkerboard artifact was reported in [38], as shown in Fig. 1 top-left. Discrete
Poisson’s equation and DGP are sensitive to sharp features or outliers, as shown in Fig. 1 top-middle and top-right.
Various remedies have been studied to improve the ro-bustness against these artifacts. First, regularization [13, 14] or smoothness term [38] was used to reﬁne the reconstruc-tion quality. However, introducing a regularization term re-quires tuning a weighting factor, increasing the effort to ob-tain a satisfactory result. Second, 2-norm of the residual vector was replaced by p-norm [6] to increase the robust-ness; however, it comes with heavier computation. Third, normal vectors with small elevation angles was treated as outliers [37], but the heuristic thresholding does not ensure the robustness to outliers.
Unlike the existing approaches, we focus on the resid-ual vector of the linear systems. Discretizing the functional or Poisson’s equation by ﬁnite difference leads to measur-ing the difference between the height values of 3D points.
The difference is therefore the vertical distance (i.e., the 2382
Vertical distance to the tangent plane (Residual)
Vertical distance between points
Tangent plane
Surface normal
𝑧
𝑦
𝑥
Surface
Point-to-plane distance (Residual)
Figure 2. (Left) Vertical distance, i.e., distance along the viewing direction and (Right) point-to-plane distance, i.e., distance along the plane normal (Ours). distance along the viewing direction) between 3D points, as illustrated in Fig. 2 left. DGP also explicitly computes the vertical distance in its local shaping step2. These systems then equate the vertical distance between points to the mea-sured gradient. Geometrically, the residual therefore repre-sents the vertical distance from the estimated point to the tangent plane at its neighboring point.
This paper introduces the perpendicular point-to-plane distance (i.e., the distance along the plane normal direc-tion) to the problem of normal integration, as illustrated in Fig. 2 right. We formulate normal integration as an inverse problem of local plane ﬁtting in the camera co-ordinates. To measure point-to-plane distances, we intro-duce plane displacements as unknowns, in addition to the points’ height values. From a geometric perspective, our method simultaneously moves points on camera rays and planes along their normal directions to minimize the sum of squared point-to-plane distances. Thanks to the formu-lation’s ﬂexibility, it is straightforward to apply our method to orthographic and perspective normal maps with arbitrary boundaries, or to estimate height values on a different do-main, such as the one used by DGP [37]. As a result, our method avoids the checkerboard artifact and performs ro-bustly against sharp features or outliers, as exempliﬁed in the bottom row of Fig. 1.
Our contributions are summarized as follows
•
•
•
We propose a new method for the problem of normal integration by jointly optimizing point positions and local plane displacements in the camera coordinates.
To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst approach performing normal integration based on point-to-plane distances.
We show the source of the checkerboard artifact in the central-difference discretized functional by evolv-ing our plane ﬁtting formulation.
We point out that discrete Poisson’s equation and DGP share the same intrinsic principle thus perform simi-larly, and demonstrate that our method is more robust 2See Fig. 3 of [37]. to outliers and sharp features than these methods. 2.