Abstract
Modern online multiple object tracking (MOT) methods usually focus on two directions to improve tracking per-formance. One is to predict new positions in an incoming frame based on tracking information from previous frames, and the other is to enhance data association by generat-ing more discriminative identity embeddings. Some works combined both directions within one framework but han-dled them as two individual tasks, thus gaining little mutual beneﬁts. In this paper, we propose a novel uniﬁed model with synergy between position prediction and embedding association. The two tasks are linked by temporal-aware target attention and distractor attention, as well as identity-aware memory aggregation model. Speciﬁcally, the atten-tion modules can make the prediction focus more on tar-gets and less on distractors, therefore more reliable embed-dings can be extracted accordingly for association. On the other hand, such reliable embeddings can boost identity-awareness through memory aggregation, hence strengthen attention modules and suppress drifts. In this way, the syn-ergy between position prediction and embedding associa-tion is achieved, which leads to strong robustness to occlu-sions. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our proposed model over a wide range of existing meth-ods on MOTChallenge benchmarks. Our code and mod-els are publicly available at https://github.com/ songguocode/TADAM . 1.

Introduction
The problem of multiple object tracking (MOT) has been studied for decades because of its broad applications such as robotics, surveillance, and autonomous driving. It aims to locate targets while maintain their identities to form tra-jectories across video frames. Recent research in the area of
MOT mostly follows the paradigm of tracking-by-detection,
*Equal contributions
Figure 1. (a) Position prediction and embedding association in ex-isting methods do not beneﬁt each other during occlusion. The prediction of target position drifts and the extracted embeddings become noisy. (b) Our method brings synergy between the two tasks via proposed model to deal with occlusion. which divides the MOT problem into two separate steps.
Object detections are obtained independently in each frame
ﬁrst, then linked across frames through data association to form trajectories, where identity embeddings are usu-ally adopted to distinguish objects during association. Such two-step procedure intuitively reveals two ways to improve the tracking performance. One is to augment detections, and the other is to enhance data association via embeddings.
Most existing online methods usually address only one of these two aspects for better tracking results, despite the fact that a common source of error, occlusions, affects both aspects. Unexpected occlusions often lead to miss detec-tions due to overlapped objects, as well as increased difﬁ-culty for data association. Many online tracking approaches
ﬁll the gaps in detections during occlusions by predicting new positions of tracked targets, while a number of stud-ies focus on generating more distinguishable embeddings 8136
to be associated throughout occlusions. Although a few re-cent works attempted to tackle both simultaneously, posi-tion prediction and embedding association were treated as two individual tasks. How to make them beneﬁt each other has not been well explored.
Common prediction methods seldom take interaction be-tween objects into account, thus position prediction itself is not strong enough when dealing with occlusions. Making predictions under heavier occlusions often leads to drifted bounding boxes, where the predicted position of a target starts to follow a neighbouring object. The embedding ex-tracted for association then deteriorates due to the wrongly predicted bounding box. This may lead to association er-rors that propagate over successive frames. Making pre-dictions harm associating embeddings instead of helping in such cases. Meanwhile, improving embeddings alone only reduces errors at association stage, which does not help pre-venting position prediction errors at ﬁrst hand. As such, there is no real synergy between the two tasks by treating them as two separate problems, as demonstrated in Fig. 1.
In this paper, we propose a uniﬁed model where position prediction and embedding association are jointly optimized with mutual beneﬁts, boosting tracking performance by en-hancing robustness to occlusions. To bring a real synergy, we make one task participate in the other’s process. The two tasks are bridged by a link consisting of a target at-tention module and a distractor attention module, as well as a discriminative memory aggregation. Identity embed-dings optimized for association are not only used in calcu-lating afﬁnity, but also applied to generate focus on a tar-get as well as suppress drift through attention modules. In this way, the position prediction is equipped with identity-awareness and becomes sensitive to nearby objects, where more correct predictions can be performed under heavier occlusions without drifts. With better predictions during occlusions and attentions on the target, higher-quality em-beddings can be extracted. Such more reliable embeddings then participate in the attention generation for better focus on the target. As a result, position prediction and embed-ding association are involved with each other, thus form a positive feedback loop with mutual beneﬁts. The synergy is further ampliﬁed by an identity-aware memory aggregation, as richer holistic embeddings accumulated over time en-able more robust attention generation. Consequently, track-ing performance in complicated scenes with occlusions is boosted. We jointly optimize the position prediction, em-bedding association, and all proposed modules under a uni-ﬁed end-to-end model. To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to achieve synergistic joint optimization on the two tasks.
The main contributions of this paper are listed as follows:
• We propose a uniﬁed online MOT model that brings mutual beneﬁts between position prediction and em-bedding association, thus achieving stronger robust-ness to occlusions.
• We apply temporal-aware target attention and distrac-tor attention as well as an identity-aware memory ag-gregation to link the two tasks.
• Our tracker achieves state-of-the-art performance on
MOTChallenge benchmarks with public detections. 2.