Abstract
Our goal is to forecast the near future given a set of re-cent observations. We think this ability to forecast, i.e., to anticipate, is integral for the success of autonomous agents which need not only passively analyze an observation but
Importantly, accurate also must react to it in real-time. forecasting hinges upon the chosen scene decomposition.
We think that superior forecasting can be achieved by de-composing a dynamic scene into individual ‘things’ and background ‘stuff’. Background ‘stuff’ largely moves be-cause of camera motion, while foreground ‘things’ move because of both camera and individual object motion. Fol-lowing this decomposition, we introduce panoptic segmen-tation forecasting. Panoptic segmentation forecasting opens up a middle-ground between existing extremes, which either forecast instance trajectories or predict the appearance of future image frames. To address this task we develop a two-component model: one component learns the dynamics of the background stuff by anticipating odometry, the other one anticipates the dynamics of detected things. We establish a leaderboard for this novel task, and validate a state-of-the-art model that outperforms available baselines. 1.

Introduction
An intelligent agent must anticipate the outcome of its movement in order to navigate safely [14, 41]. Said dif-ferently, successful autonomous agents need to understand the dynamics of their observations and forecast likely future scenarios in order to successfully operate in an evolving en-vironment. However, contemporary work in computer vi-sion largely analyzes observations, i.e., it studies the appar-ent. For instance, classical semantic segmentation [8, 42] aims to delineate the observed outline of objects. While un-derstanding an observation is a ﬁrst seminal step, it is only part of our job. Analyzing the currently observed frame means information is out of date by the time we know the outcome, regardless of the processing time. It is even more stale by the time an autonomous agent can perform an ac-tion. Successful agents therefore need to anticipate the fu-ture ‘state’ of the observed scene. An important question,
∗Work done during an internship at Niantic.
Input Frames
Our Panoptic Segmentation Forecast
Figure 1. We study the novel task of ‘panoptic segmentation fore-casting’ and propose a state-of-the-art method that models the motion of individual ‘thing’ instances separately while modeling
‘stuff’ as purely a function of estimated camera motion. however, remains open: what is a suitable ‘state’ represen-tation for the future of an observed scene?
Panoptic segmentation recently emerged as a rich repre-sentation of a scene. Panoptic segmentation classiﬁes each pixel as either belonging to a foreground instance, the union of which is referred to as ‘things,’ or as a background class, referred to as ‘stuff’ [23, 5]. This decomposition is useful for forecasting because we expect different dynamics for each component: ‘stuff’ moves because of the observer’s motion, while ‘things’ move because of both observer and object motion. Use of panoptic segmentation is further un-derlined by the fact that it separates different instances of objects, each of which we expect to move individually.
Consequently, we propose to study the novel task of
‘panoptic segmentation forecasting’: given a set of ob-served frames, the goal is to forecast the panoptic segmen-tation for a set of unobserved frames (Fig. 1). We also pro-pose a ﬁrst approach to forecasting future panoptic segmen-tations. In contrast to typical semantic forecasting [44, 52], 12517
we model the motion of individual object instances and the background separately. This makes instance information persistent during forecasting, and allows us to understand the motion of each moving object.
To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to fore-cast panoptic segmentations for future, unseen frames in an image sequence. We establish a leaderboard for this task on the challenging Cityscapes dataset [12] and in-clude a set of baseline algorithms. Our method for fu-ture panoptic segmentation relies on a number of innova-tions (Sec. 3.1), that we ablate to prove their value. Our method also results in state-of-the-art on previously es-tablished tasks of future semantic and instance segmen-tation. Code implementing models and experiments can be found at https://github.com/nianticlabs/ panoptic-forecasting. 2.