Abstract
Driven by the success of deep learning, the last decade has seen rapid advances in person re-identiﬁcation (re-ID).
Nonetheless, most of approaches assume that the input is given with the fulﬁllment of expectations, while imperfect input remains rarely explored to date, which is a non-trivial problem since directly apply existing methods without ad-justment can cause signiﬁcant performance degradation. In this paper, we focus on recognizing partial (ﬂawed) input with the assistance of proposed Part-Part Correspondence
Learning (PPCL), a self-supervised learning framework that learns correspondence between image patches without any additional part-level supervision. Accordingly, we propose
Part-Part Cycle (PP-Cycle) constraint and Part-Part Triplet (PP-Triplet) constraint that exploit the duality and unique-ness between corresponding image patches respectively. We verify our proposed PPCL on several partial person re-ID benchmarks. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach can surpass previous methods in terms of the stan-dard evaluation metric. 1.

Introduction
For most of computer vision tasks, the input data for al-gorithms is commonly assumed to be complete or with ade-quate information that can be recognized [28, 48, 38, 44, 62].
But in the real-world scenario, especially for person re-identiﬁcation (re-ID) in the surveillance video, this assump-tion can not always be satisﬁed due to ﬂawed data process pipeline (e.g., imperfect detectors [41], communication fail-ures, pose variances, etc.). While as shown in Figure 5, trivially apply existing methods without adjustment causes signiﬁcant performance degradation, since Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNN) usually suffer from understanding part-whole relationships [27]. In this paper, we focus on this practical yet challenging problem, where the input image is represented by only a continuous part of the original one.
To alleviate the challenge of partial person re-ID, there are two main difﬁculties: 1) as shown in Figure 1a, the (a) (b) (c)
Figure 1: (a): Partial person re-ID is required to adapt to variances on input scales and regions. (b): The irrelevant region needs to be eliminated when measuring similarity between two images. (c): We employ GLRec to rectify arbi-trary input and CRLoc to predict semantically corresponding partial region. partial input images are typically provided with unknown size and scale; 2) as shown in Figure 1b, when computing the similarity with the reference image, the irrelevant par-tial regions may bring much noise for recognition. To our knowledge, the present studies for partial person re-ID have been developed from two perspectives: 1) learn a multi-scale feature to adapt to arbitrary input size [15, 16, 35]; 2) lo-cate shared regions between partial image and the reference one [46, 36]. However, these methods typically address one of aforementioned difﬁculties and less effort has been made to solve both of them in an uniﬁed framework. This exactly motivates our work.
In this paper, we tackle partial person re-ID problem by proposing Part-Part Correspondence Learning (PPCL), as illustrated in Figure 1c, in which we propose a gated layout rectiﬁer (GLRec) and a corresponding region locator (CR-Loc) to cope with aforementioned difﬁculties respectively.
Concretely, the GLRec module is a gated transformation regression CNN module that takes an arbitrary partial image xp in, and outputs a rectiﬁed result xr with predicted afﬁne transformation coefﬁcients. Through the GLRec module, we 9105
may reduce input space and obtain a rectiﬁed partial image with proper scale and layout. Then, to measure the similarity between the rectiﬁed partial image xr and a reference image y, we extract spatial features of them through a backbone network, and employ the CRLoc module to produce a corre-sponding patch in y according to xr. Finally, the similarity between two images are only calculated based on the shared semantically corresponding regions.
However, to train the CRLoc module, a key challenge here is that, for most of image recognition tasks, we only have image-level supervision while there is no part-level correspondence signal available during training. Therefore, we exploit the nature of part-part relationship, and accord-ingly propose two self-supervised training schemes that work coordinately to achieve PPCL:
• Part-Part Cycle constraint (PP-Cycle): We leverage the duality of the functionality on ﬁnding correspond-ing regions according to the given input. We assume that, if the CRLoc module is able to predict a corre-sponding patch in y according to xr, then it will also be able to translate back to achieve xr. Therefore, we enable a self-supervised cycle consistency constraint in model optimization. The philosophy behind PP-Cycle is demonstrated in Figure 4a.
• Part-Part Triplet constraint (PP-Triplet): We lever-age the uniqueness of the optimal corresponding region between two image patches for a given partial input.
We regard the given partial input as anchor, the output of the CRLoc module as positive exemplar. Along with the randomly sampled negative exemplar inside the ref-erence image, we formulate a triplet constraint on those three patches. We show the principle of PP-Triplet in
Figure 4b.
Basically, our methodology is expected to automatically
ﬁnd the semantically corresponding regions on reference images according to the given partial query image without any additional supervision. It also offers new insights on correspondence learning for part-part matching. In our exper-iments, we apply our PPCL to partial person re-ID problem, considering its impact in real-world applications. We boost the Rank-1 performance on Partial-REID benchmark from 67.7% to 83.7%, and obtain state-of-the-art performance on
Partial-iLIDS. We also qualitatively demonstrate that PPCL indeed learns the semantic correspondence between image patches. In addition, we also provide extended experimental results on partial face recognition. 2.