Abstract outfit a
The multimedia community has recently seen a tremen-dous surge of interest in the fashion recommendation prob-lem. A lot of efforts have been made to model the com-patibility between fashion items. Some have also studied users’ personal preferences for the outﬁts. There is, how-ever, another difﬁculty in the task that hasn’t been dealt with carefully by previous work. Users that are new to the sys-tem usually only have several (less than 5) outﬁts available for learning. With such a limited number of training exam-ples, it is challenging to model the user’s preferences reli-ably. In this work, we propose a new solution for personal-ized outﬁt recommendation that is capable of handling this case. We use a stacked self-attention mechanism to model the high-order interactions among the items. We then em-bed the items in an outﬁt into a single compact representa-tion within the outﬁt space. To accommodate the variety of users’ preferences, we characterize each user with a set of anchors, i.e. a group of learnable latent vectors in the out-ﬁt space that are the representatives of the outﬁts the user likes. We also learn a set of general anchors to model the general preference shared by all users. Based on this rep-resentation of the outﬁts and the users, we propose a simple but effective strategy for the new user proﬁling tasks. Exten-sive experiments on large scale real-world datasets demon-strate the performance of our proposed method. 1.

Introduction
Personalized outﬁt recommendation is the task of pre-dicting whether a set of fashion items that constitute an outﬁt are well matched and whether they ﬁt the taste of a speciﬁc user. It has wide applications in fashion oriented social networks and online shopping. However, mining the compatibility relationships between items and capturing the diverse fashion preferences of different users can be very
*The corresponding author is Yang Hu. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61602090). outfit b outfit c embedding of outfits anchors of user 1 anchors of user 2 outfit style space (a)
User 
Proﬁling
Outﬁt 1
Recommendation results based on outﬁt 1
User 
Proﬁling
Outﬁt 2
Recommendation results based on outﬁt  2 (b)
Figure 1: (a) Outﬁt style space. Each user is represented by a set of anchors in the outﬁt style space. (b) Examples of recommended results for new users with only one historical outﬁt. The outﬁts in orange boxes are positive outﬁts and those in blue boxes are negative outﬁts. Our method rec-ommends compatible outﬁts that ﬁt the taste of a user even with very few learning examples. challenging. Compared to visual similarity, both the com-patibility and the personal preference relations are more im-plicit and subtle.
Many previous works have studied the compatibility be-tween a pair of fashion items [22, 36]. When it comes to outﬁts that consist of multiple items, some works decom-12722
pose the outﬁt into a set of pairwise interactions and resort to the pairwise approaches [34, 32]. This strategy, however, fails to capture the high-order relations among the items. To address this limitation, some holistic approaches [6, 18, 33]
[6] take the have been proposed. For example, Han el at. items in an outﬁt as a sequence and use recurrent networks such as vanilla RNN and LSTM to model the compatibility of an outﬁt. These methods are usually not permutation in-variant and the results may be sensitive to the order of the fashion items.
Furthermore, a user’s personal taste is also critical for outﬁt recommendation. The outﬁts users like may have a variety of styles. Some previous works [14, 20, 31] have shown that by incorporating user’s preference, the out-ﬁt recommending performance can be greatly improved.
A widespread difﬁculty for personalized recommendation problems is that the number of historical samples for each user is usually very small [21]. To address this limitation, researchers exploit collaborative learning techniques that utilize rating data of other users to augment the data of cur-rent user. However, previous methods for personalized out-ﬁt recommendation usually only combine data of different users to model the content of fashion items. The parameters that characterize users’ preferences are still learnt only with each user’s own data. It would be difﬁcult to learn these pa-rameters well when the number of corresponding training outﬁts is small. The situation becomes even worse for new users that just join in and only have very few outﬁts rated.
This cold-start problem has not been carefully studied by existing works on outﬁt recommendation.
In this work, we treat outﬁt compatibility prediction as a problem with set-input [17, 41] and use the self-attention mechanism [35] to model the interactions among fashion items. As illustrated in Fig. 1a, we represent each outﬁt as a point in the outﬁt style space. This outﬁt representa-tion is compact, permutation invariant, and able to capture the high-order relation among the items. And to better cap-ture the diverse tastes of users, we introduce a learnable per-sonalized anchor embedding (LPAE) approach. We model the style preference of a user with a set of anchors, i.e. a group of learnable latent vectors in the outﬁt style space.
We also learn a set of general anchors to model the general preference shared by all users. Based on this representa-tion of the outﬁts and the users, the user’s preference for an outﬁt is measured by the anchor-outﬁt similarity. Sim-ilarly, for new user modeling, the user’s proﬁle is learnt by assembling existing anchors based on the anchor-outﬁt similarity, which is effective when training data is scarce.
We show two examples of the new user (cold start) prob-lem [21] in Fig. 1b where each user only provides one outﬁt as reference. Since the anchor-outﬁt similarity is learnt in a metric-learning [13, 15] manner, it can serve as a bridge to measure the outﬁt-to-outﬁt and user-to-user relations. This similarity propagation process can introduce a certain de-gree of interpretability into the recommendation results. 2.