Abstract
In this paper, we propose a progressive margin loss (PM-L) approach for unconstrained facial age classiﬁcation.
Conventional methods make strong assumption on that each class owns adequate instances to outline its data distribu-tion, likely leading to bias prediction where the training samples are sparse across age classes. Instead, our PML aims to adaptively reﬁne the age label pattern by enforc-ing a couple of margins, which fully takes in the in-between discrepancy of the intra-class variance, inter-class vari-ance and class center. Our PML typically incorporates with the ordinal margin and the variational margin, simultane-ously plugging in the globally-tuned deep neural network paradigm. More speciﬁcally, the ordinal margin learns to exploit the correlated relationship of the real-world age la-bels. Accordingly, the variational margin is leveraged to minimize the inﬂuence of head classes that misleads the pre-diction of tailed samples. Moreover, our optimization care-fully seeks a series of indicator curricula to achieve robust and efﬁcient model training. Extensive experimental result-s on three face aging datasets demonstrate that our PML achieves compelling performance compared to state of the art. Code will be made publicly. 1.

Introduction
Facial age classiﬁcation (a.k.a., facial age estima-tion) aims to predict the exact biological ages from given fa-cial images, which has a lot of potential computer vision ap-plications such as human-computer interaction [53, 15] and facial attribute analysis [39, 4]. While numerous works have been devoted recently [17, 27, 18, 50, 43], the performance still remains limited in wild conditions, which is mainly due to that the datasets often undergo long-tailed distribu-∗Corresponding author. tion with many minority classes (tail) and a few common classes (head). When learning with the long-tailed age da-ta, a common problem is that the head classes usually dom-inate the training convergence. Therefore, the learned age classiﬁcation model tends to perform better on head class-es, whereas the performance degrades in tail classes. This quite motivates us to develop a robust facial age classiﬁ-cation approach versus imbalanced age data. In the left of
Fig. 1, we visualize some failure cases caused by existing age classiﬁcation methods.
Facial age classiﬁcation approaches could be roughly di-vided into the single label learning (SLL)-based [17, 18, 43, 11] and the label distribution learning (LDL)-based [50, 31, 51, 52, 36]. SLL-based methods typically classify one s-ingle age for a given facial image, which treats each age independently. However, they ignore human face changes gradually with progressive ages, thus the facial appearance is usually indiscriminative at adjacent age classes. To fur-ther model the age correlation, Geng et al. [19] proposed an
LDL method to map the real-valued ground-truth to a Gaus-sian label distribution. However, the performance degrades in such long-tailed case where the feature representation of minority is suppressed by the majority classes.
To address the long-tailed data issue, we propose a pro-gressive margin loss (PML) approach for age classiﬁcation, which aims to leverage semantic margins to reduce intra-class variance and enlarge inter-class variance simultane-ously. As shown in Fig. 2, we carefully develop a progres-sive margin loss at the top of deep neural networks with p-reserving the age-difference cost information. Technically, our proposed PML is composed of two crucial branches in-cluding an ordinal margin learning and a variational margin learning. The ordinal margin attempts to extract discrim-inative features while maintaining the relation of the age order. For efﬁcient optimization, we develop a series of in-dicators by following the curriculum-learning method. To validate the effectiveness of our proposed method, we per-10503
Figure 1. Our approach versus existing label distribution learning approaches. We expect the ground truth (red square or red triangle) to be at the center of the label prediction, where one sample in the head category (blue square) and another sample in the tail category (blue triangle) should be enforced by a margin from the real age. It is valuable to be notiﬁed that the dotted frame represents the position before adjustment. Top: The baseline method reasons the multi-modal distribution, because the head classes dominate the tail classes. Our proposed PML addresses this error by preventing the tail class from disturbance of the head. Bottom: The baseline method could hardly
ﬁnd effective features in tail categories and limited to output the uniform distribution. Our PML achieves robust feature representation by integrating the relation of adjacent age classes. (Best viewed in color PDF ﬁle.) form extensive experiments on three widely-used face aging datasets, where each dataset undergoes varying degrees of the imbalance. From the results, we achieve superior perfor-mance compared with the state-of-the-art methods especial-ly only with fewer samples. For example, without using any external datasets, we decrease the MAE by 1.56 compared with the recently reported benchmark with only sparse and limited samples. 2.