Abstract
The task of point cloud completion aims to predict the missing part for an incomplete 3D shape. A widely used strategy is to generate a complete point cloud from the incomplete one. However, the unordered nature of point clouds will degrade the generation of high-quality 3D shapes, as the detailed topology and structure of discrete points are hard to be captured by the generative process only using a latent code. In this paper, we address the above problem by reconsidering the completion task from a new perspective, where we formulate the prediction as a point cloud deformation process. Speciﬁcally, we design a novel neural network, named PMP-Net, to mimic the behavior of an earth mover. It moves move each point of the incomplete input to complete the point cloud, where the total distance of point moving paths (PMP) should be shortest. There-fore, PMP-Net predicts a unique point moving path for each point according to the constraint of total point moving dis-tances. As a result, the network learns a strict and unique correspondence on point-level, and thus improves the qual-ity of the predicted complete shape. We conduct compre-hensive experiments on Completion3D and PCN datasets, which demonstrate our advantages over the state-of-the-art point cloud completion methods. Code will be available at https://github.com/diviswen/PMP-Net. 1.

Introduction
As one of the widely used 3D shape representations, point cloud can be easily obtained through depth cameras or other 3D scanning devices. Due to the limitations of view-angles or occlusions of 3D scanning devices, the raw point clouds are usually sparse and incomplete [41]. Therefore, a
*Corresponding author. This work was supported by National Key
R&D Program of China (2020YFF0304100, 2018YFB0505400), the Na-tional Natural Science Foundation of China (62072268), and in part by
Tsinghua-Kuaishou Institute of Future Media Data.
Figure 1. Illustration of completion by multi-step point cloud de-formation. The point moving paths are denoted by grey lines. At each step, the source point cloud is colored by orange and the tar-get point cloud is colored by yellow, respectively. shape completion/consolidation process is usually required to generate the missing regions of 3D shape for the down-stream 3D computer vision applications like classiﬁcation
[12, 6, 39, 10, 22, 21], segmentation [40, 17] and other vi-sual analysis [47].
In this paper, we focus on the completion task for 3D objects represented by point clouds, where the missing parts are caused by self-occlusion due to the view angle of scanner. Most of the previous methods formulate the point cloud completion as a point cloud generation problem
[2, 41, 48, 34], where an encoder-decoder framework is usu-ally adopted to extract a latent code from the input incom-plete point cloud, and decode the extracted latent code into a complete point cloud. Beneﬁting from the deep learning based point cloud learning methods, the point cloud com-pletion methods along this line have made huge progress in the last few years [41, 34]. However, the generation of point clouds remains a difﬁcult task using deep neural network, because the unordered nature of point clouds makes the gen-erative model difﬁcult to capture the detailed topology or structure among discrete points [34]. Therefore, the com-pletion quality of point clouds based on generative models is still unsatisfying.
To address this issue, in this paper, we propose a novel neural network, named PMP-Net, to formulate the task of point cloud completion from a new perspective. Different from the generative model that directly predicts the coor-dinations of all points in 3D space, the PMP-Net learns to 7443
Figure 2. Illustration of path searching with multiple steps under the coarse-to-ﬁne searching radius. The PMP-Net moves point A to point A’ by three steps, with each step reducing its searching radius, and looking back to consider the moving history in order to decide the next place to move. move the points from the source 3D shape to the target one.
Through the point moving process, the PMP-Net establishes the point-level correspondences between the source point cloud and the target, which captures the detailed topology and structure relationships between the two point clouds.
On the other hand, there are various solutions to move points from source to target, which will confuse the network during training. Therefore, in order to encourage the net-work to learn a unique arrangement of point moving path, we take the inspiration from the Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD) and propose to regularize a Point-Moving-Path Net-work (PMP-Net) under the constraint of the total point mov-ing distances (PMDs), which guarantees the uniqueness of path arrangement between the source point cloud and the target one.
Moreover, in order to predict the point moving path more accurately, we propose a multi-step path searching strategy to continuously reﬁne the point moving path under multi-scaled searching radius. Speciﬁcally, as shown in Figure 2, the path searching is repeated for multiple steps in a coarse-to-ﬁne manner. Each step will take the previously predicted paths into consideration, and then plan its next move path according to the previous paths. To record and aggregate the history information of point moving path, we take the inspiration from Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) to propose a novel Recurrent Path Aggregation (RPA) module. It can memorize and aggregate the route sequence for each point, and combine the previous information with the current lo-cation of point to predict the direction and the length for the next move. By reducing the searching radius step-by-step,
PMP-Net can consistently reﬁne a more and more accurate path for each point to move from its original position on the incomplete point cloud to the target position on the com-plete point cloud. In all, the main contribution of our work can be summarized as follows.
• We propose a novel network for point cloud comple-tion task, named PMP-Net, to move each point from the incomplete shape to the complete one to achieve a high quality point cloud completion. Compared with previous generative completion methods, PMP-Net has the ability to learn more detailed topology and structure relationships between incomplete shapes and complete ones, by learning the point-level correspon-dence through point moving path prediction.
• We propose to learn a unique point moving path ar-rangement between input and output point clouds, by regularizing the network using the constraint of Earth
Mover’s Distance. As a result, the network will not be confused by multiple solutions of moving points, and ﬁnally predicts a meaningful point-wise corre-spondence between the source and target point clouds.
• We propose to search point moving path with multiple steps in a coarse-to-ﬁne manner. Each step will de-cide the next move based on the aggregated informa-tion from the previous paths and its current location, by using the proposed Recurrent Path Aggregation (RPA) module. 2.