Abstract
We address the generalization ability of recent learning-based point cloud registration methods. Despite their suc-cess, these approaches tend to have poor performance when applied to mismatched conditions that are not well-represented in the training set, such as unseen object cat-egories, different complex scenes, or unknown depth sen-sors.
In these circumstances, it has often been better to rely on classical non-learning methods (e.g., Iterative Clos-est Point), which have better generalization ability. Hybrid learning methods, that use learning for predicting point correspondences and then a deterministic step for align-ment, have offered some respite, but are still limited in their generalization abilities. We revisit a recent innovation—
PointNetLK [1]—and show that the inclusion of an analyti-cal Jacobian can exhibit remarkable generalization proper-ties while reaping the inherent ﬁdelity beneﬁts of a learning framework. Our approach not only outperforms the state-of-the-art in mismatched conditions but also produces re-sults competitive with current learning methods when oper-ating on real-world test data close to the training set. 1.

Introduction
Imagine a situation where you want to align two point clouds—but have little to no knowledge about the sensor noise, point density, or scene complexity before applying your algorithm (see Fig. 1). Under these circumstances, modern learning-based 3D point alignment methods exhibit surprisingly poor performance. This is a common expe-rience within many industrial robotic and vision applica-tions. The usual strategy is to instead rely on classical non-learning methods for 3D point alignment—such as Itera-tive Closest Point (ICP) [4]—whose performance is infe-rior to what is now possible through learning-based meth-ods [16, 32] but can generalize well to unknown condi-tions. An obvious drawback here is the hand-crafted guess-work associated with these non-learning methods, which
Figure 1. Our analytical derivation of PointNetLK can be trained on a clean, dense, synthetic 3D object dataset and still accurately align noisy, sparse, real-world 3D scenes. Green is the template point cloud, purple is the registered point cloud, and the orange point clouds are an object training set. ξ are the rigid transforma-tion parameters inferred by our method. can make their performance less than desirable.
In this paper, we advocate for a revisiting of the recent
PointNetLK algorithm [1]. We propose a novel derivation, which circumvents many of its current limitations in terms of robustness and ﬁdelity. Our approach employs an ana-lytical Jacobian matrix that can be decomposed into feature and warp components. A speciﬁc advantage of this decom-position is the ability to modify the analytical warp Jacobian without having to re-train the PointNet features. We demon-strate how this property can be used to great effect through a voxelization process that can accommodate the alignment of complex real-world scenes (i.e., 3DMatch [44]) by train-ing solely on clean, dense synthetic objects (i.e., Model-Net [37]). Further, in matched train-test conditions, we show that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art hybrid methods, including correspondence-based methods [35,43], and the original PointNetLK of Aoki et al. Finally, we demonstrate how our approach can achieve results compet-itive with those of the state-of-the-art Deep Global Regis-tration (DGR) [8] method on real-world scenes, even when the latter is trained under matched conditions. These results are in stark contrast to those presented by Aoki et al. whose
Code available at https://github.com/Lilac-Lee/PointNetLK Revisited.git. 12763
experimental results were limited to synthetic objects.
Why revisit PointNetLK? Methods that use learning for predicting point correspondences, followed by a determin-istic step (e.g., singular value decomposition (SVD) [35]) to determine the alignment have become particularly popular.
These hybrid methods [8, 35, 36, 42, 43]—so called because they combine modern learning with classical algorithms— exhibit some useful generalization properties. Aoki et al.’s
PointNetLK approach [1] can also be considered a hybrid method as it leverages insights from the classical Lucas &
Kanade (LK) [23] algorithm. Instead of using a neural net-work for modeling the entire registration pipeline, the ap-proach learns only a point cloud embedding (i.e., Point-Net [28]). PointNetLK is unique to other recent hybrid methods in that it aligns directly with a learned feature representation—as opposed to using learning for predict-ing point correspondences. We believe it is this inherent feature-centric abstraction of the point cloud that lies at the heart of LK’s generalization properties. Our analytical re-visiting of the PointNetLK framework shines a clearer light upon these remarkable properties for real-world problems. 2.