Abstract
Input
Semantic Instance
In this paper we propose a new framework for point cloud instance segmentation. Our framework has two steps: an embedding step and a clustering step. In the embedding step, our main contribution is to propose a probabilistic em-bedding space for point cloud embedding. Speciﬁcally, each point is represented as a tri-variate normal distribution. In the clustering step, we propose a novel loss function, which beneﬁts both the semantic segmentation and the clustering.
Our experimental results show important improvements to the SOTA, i.e., 3.1% increased average per-category mAP on the PartNet dataset. 1.

Introduction
In this paper we tackle the problem of instance segmen-tation of point clouds. In instance segmentation we would like to assign two labels to each point in a point cloud. The
ﬁrst label is the class label (e.g., leg, back, seat, ... for a chair data set) and the second label is the instance ID (a unique number, e.g., to distinguish the different legs of a chair). While instance segmentation had many recent suc-cesses in the image domain [11, 24, 7, 27, 4, 26], we believe that the problem of instance segmentation for point clouds is not sufﬁciently explored.
We build our work on the idea of embedding-based in-stance segmentation, that is very popular in the image and volume domain [7, 27, 4, 26, 21] and has also been success-fully applied in the point clouds domain [33, 34]. In this approach typically two steps are employed. In the ﬁrst step, each point (or pixel) is embedded in a feature space such that points belonging to the same instance should be close and points belonging to different instances should be further apart from each other. In the second step points are grouped using a clustering algorithm, such as mean-shift or greedy clustering.
One important design choice in embedding-based meth-ods is the dimensionality of the feature space. Some meth-ods propose to use a high dimensional feature space [4, 20], while others use a low dimensional features space that has
...
Figure 1: Our method takes a point cloud as input, encodes the points as random variables, and outputs semantic class labels and instance labels. the same dimensionality as the input data [27, 16, 26], e.g., 2D for images, and 3D for point clouds. Methods with a low dimensional embedding space not only have lower computational complexity, but they also lead to better inter-pretability, e.g., embeddings are encoded as offset vectors towards instance centers.
Therefore, the main goal of our work is to extend the ex-pressiveness of the embedding space in a way that leads to improved segmentation performance. Our proposed solu-tion is to employ probabilistic embeddings, such that each point in the embedding space is encoded by a distribution.
While assessing uncertainty is a popular tool in recent com-puter vision research [15, 17, 23, 5] and we introduce this idea to the task of instance segmentation. Incorporating un-certainty leads to an important improvement in segmenta-tion performance. For example, on the PartNet [25] ﬁne-grained instance segmentation dataset we can improve the
SOTA by 3.1% average per-category mAP.
In the remainder of the paper, we will give more de-tails on the probabilistic embedding algorithm (Sec. 3), ex-plain the embedding step (Sec. 3.1) and the clustering step (Sec. 3.4) in more detail.
Contribution. Our main contributions are as follows 1. We propose to use probabilistic embeddings for in-stance segmentation and present a complete frame-work in the context of point cloud instance segmen-tation based on probabilistic embeddings. 2. We develop a new loss function for the clustering step 8883
ei ei ei ej ej ej (a) Euclidean (b) Cosine
Figure 2: Examples of (dis)similarity measures. (c) Probabilistic that is especially suited for high-granularity data sets. 3. We show that the proposed probabilistic embeddings can be incorporated into existing embedding-based methods. 2.