Abstract
We propose a novel point annotated setting for the weakly semi-supervised object detection task, in which the dataset comprises small fully annotated images and large weakly annotated images by points. It achieves a balance between tremendous annotation burden and detection per-formance. Based on this setting, we analyze existing de-tectors and ﬁnd that these detectors have difﬁculty in fully exploiting the power of the annotated points. To solve this, we introduce a new detector, Point DETR, which extends
DETR by adding a point encoder. Extensive experiments conducted on MS-COCO dataset in various data settings show the effectiveness of our method. In particular, when using 20% fully labeled data from COCO, our detector achieves a promising performance, 33.3 AP, which outper-forms a strong baseline (FCOS) by 2.0 AP, and we demon-strate the point annotations bring over 10 points in various
AR metrics. 1.

Introduction
Object detection is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision. Modern object detectors [12, 14, 15, 22, 29] have achieved great success with the help of tremen-dous annotated data. However, it is very costly to annotate a large amount of detection data. Speciﬁcally, for each ob-ject instance, a precise bounding box needs to be labeled manually and carefully, which is quite time-consuming: it takes 10-35 seconds [27, 24, 1] for labeling an object.
To reduce the cost of data annotation, weakly super-vised object detection (WSOD) and semi-supervised object detection (SSOD) methods are proposed. Weakly super-vised object detection methods [2, 11, 25, 36] utilize large data with weak annotations, such as image labels, which is far easier to collect than precisely annotated bound-ing boxes. The semi-supervised object detection methods
[10, 17, 26, 28, 31] learn detectors with a small amount of box-level labeled images and large unlabeled images,
*Equally contribution.
†Corresponding author. where the cost of image annotation is small. Although these methods can reduce the cost of annotation signiﬁ-cantly, their performance is far inferior to their supervised counterparts [14, 15, 29]. To make a trade-off between an-notation cost and performance, weakly semi-supervised ob-ject detection methods (WSSOD) [33] are studied, which use small box-level labeled images as well as large weakly labeled images to learn detectors. However, image-level annotations in weakly annotated data are not optimal for object detection task since image labels do not contain the instance-level information of all objects. Motivated by [1], we annotate each instance in the image by one point (as shown in Figure 1d) instead of image-level annotation, for two main reasons. Firstly, compared with image-level an-notation, points bring much richer information, not only the category of the object but also the strong prior of object location. Secondly, there is no strict requirement on point annotations, such as center points of objects. Thus, the in-crease in the cost of labeling is marginal compared with the image-level annotation [1]: 23.3 sec/image vs. 20.0 sec/image in VOC dataset [6].
Though the above new setting is better for weakly semi-supervised object detection, most recent detectors [14, 15, 29] have difﬁculty in predicting object boxes based on point annotations. In most detectors, FPN [14] is a basic compo-nent, which utilizes multi-level feature maps to predict ob-ject boxes. FPN can boost the performance of detectors, but it is incompetent to predict object boxes using point anno-tations since it is difﬁcult to select the optimal box predic-tion from multi-level ones, predicted for a point annotation.
For the single-level feature detectors, they may suffer from bad performance [20, 21, 22] or strict requirement on point annotations [5, 12, 35] even though they avoid choosing feature map levels.
Inspired by DETR [4] which achieves competitive per-formance with a single-level feature map, we propose a novel detector, Point DETR, by adding a point encoder to
DETR in this paper. It can predict object boxes precisely from point annotations. Speciﬁcally, it uses a single-level feature map to predict object boxes, avoiding the multi-level selection problem and can predict object boxes with loose 8823
(a) Weakly supervised object detection (b) Semi-supervised object detection (c) Weakly semi-supervised object detection with image-level label (d) Weakly semi-supervised object detection with points (ours)
Figure 1. Different types of object detection settings to reduce the cost of data annotation points, having no strict requirement on point annotations.
Besides, it inherits the strong representation of DETR, hav-ing a good performance on object detection. But, different from DETR, we encode position and category of annotated points into object queries with the point encoder, which eas-ily establishes one-to-one correspondences between points and object queries, being ﬁt for box prediction based on points.
In addition, to boost detection performance and make optimization easier, we do box predictions as offsets w.r.t. point position rather than make box predictions di-rectly like DETR.
To show the superiority of our detector, we mainly eval-uate our proposed detector on the MS-COCO dataset [16].
To make a fair comparison, we take FCOS [29] as the de-fault baseline, which is regarded as a point-based detector.
Following our proposed weakly semi-supervised object de-tection setting, object instances of small image data fraction (5% ∼ 50%) are annotated fully and the rest are annotated by points.
In these various settings with a different frac-tion of fully-annotated image data, our proposed detector outperforms other modern detectors, including multi-level feature detectors and single-level feature detectors. In par-ticular, when using 20% fully labeled data from COCO, our detector outperforms FCOS and Faster R-CNN by 2.0 AP and 1.9 AP, respectively.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose a potential and novel setting for the weakly semi-supervised object detection task, which com-prises small fully annotated images and large weakly annotated images by points. Compared with the image-level data setting [1], this setting introduces weakly instance-level information with marginal an-notation cost, which is ﬁt for object detection. This provides a new perspective to improve detection per-formance with weakly annotated detection images.
• Based on the above setting, we analyze the drawbacks of existing modern object detectors and propose Point
DETR, which is simple and easily implemented. The proposed detector takes object points as input, trans-forms these points into object queries, and predicts ob-ject box precisely for these queries, as shown in Fig-ure 3.
• Extensive experiments on COCO dataset [16] are con-ducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of our pro-posed detector. Our detector outperforms most modern detectors in various data settings. We also do quantity and quality experiments to show our detector solves the problems suffered by most modern detectors. 2.