Abstract
We introduce a novel method for recovering per-pixel surface normals from a pair of polarization cameras. Un-like past methods that use polarimetric observations as aux-iliary features for correspondence matching, we fully inte-grate them in cost volume construction and ﬁltering to di-rectly recover per-pixel surface normals, not as byproducts of recovered disparities. Our key idea is to introduce a po-larimetric cost volume of distance deﬁned on the polarimet-ric observations and the polarization state computed from the surface normal. We adapt a belief propagation algo-rithm to ﬁlter this cost volume. The ﬁltering algorithm si-multaneously estimates the disparities and surface normals as separate entities, while effectively denoising the origi-nal noisy polarimetric observations of a quad-Bayer po-larization camera.
In addition, in contrast to past meth-ods, we model polarimetric light reﬂection of mesoscopic surface roughness, which is essential to account for its illumination-dependency. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on a number of complex, real objects. Our method offers a simple and detailed 3D sensing capability for complex, non-Lambertian surfaces. 1.

Introduction
Stereo reconstruction has been a long-standing research topic in computer vision since its inception. Binocular stereo, in particular, has been studied in depth and has been deployed in a wide range of applications. Its simple pas-sive setup which requires minimal calibration, maintenance, and cost has made it a reliable choice for 3D sensing. Even when alternative methods with higher precision are avail-able, binocular stereo is often favored for its dense per-pixel depth that comes with relatively low cost for computation.
Stereo, however, is inherently limited by its underlying reconstruction process, namely matching and triangulation.
Correspondence matching fundamentally requires view-independent appearance (color constancy), which translates to limited applicability in terms of target surface materials.
Despite the large body of work including those that train deep neural networks to establish matching metrics, depart-ing from this Lambertian surface requirement remains chal-lenging. Triangulating the resulting correspondences also only recovers surface depth. For most cases, due to the fragility of this matching and triangulation, spatial regu-larization and quantization are employed. As a result, the geometry recovered by stereo, albeit useful for many appli-cations, is often a crude measurement of the true surface.
Can we make stereo, in particular, simple binocular stereo recover detailed geometry of real-world surfaces that are composed of arbitrary materials? Can we match non-Lambertian surface points, but recover the geometry with-out relying solely on their geometric triangulation? In this paper, we show that we can achieve these by exploiting po-larization of light reﬂected from real-world surfaces.
Catapulted by the introduction of quad-Bayer polariza-tion cameras, polarization cues have started to see adoption in a wide range of computer vision methods. Geometry re-construction is no exception (see Sec. 2). These past meth-ods, however, use polarization as auxiliary cues for match-ing and proceeds with regular triangulation of depth. Sur-face normals are only computed from the recovered depth.
That is, they are byproducts of the depth and not mea-surements of the actual surface normals. They also ignore the complex polarimetric reﬂection properties and assume purely Lambertian or mirror reﬂection, which ostracizes a broad range of real-world materials and lighting conditions.
In this paper, we show that we can establish surface point correspondences in a polarimetric stereo pair and recover per-pixel surface normals from the two polarimetric obser-vations. We also integrate a full polarimetric BRDF model to handle complex lighting-dependent polarimetric reﬂec-tion. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst to show that surface normals can be directly, not as a byprod-uct of depth, recovered from binocular polarimetric stereo for a wide range of surfaces from matte, glossy, to mirrored.
Our key idea is to formulate simultaneous estimation of per-pixel depth-independent normal and albedo as RGB-In addition to a regu-polarimetric cost volume ﬁltering. lar RGB cost volume as a function of pixel disparities, we also construct a polarimetric cost volume that stores Stokes 682
vector differences for different surface normals and albedo values. These surface normals are computed directly from corresponding Stokes vectors in the two stereo views given hypothesized disparity values. Our goal is to ﬁlter these cost volumes to arrive at optimal disparities that give pixel cor-respondences, which in turn enables computation of surface normals and albedo values from the two Stokes vectors.
We achieve this cost volume ﬁltering using belief prop-agation with three distinct characteristics. First, ﬁltering of the two cost volumes are seamlessly integrating by multi-plication of their beliefs. Second, the beliefs encode surface normals and use them to propagate disparities according to them. This leads to depth estimates that respect the sur-face normals measured in their view-dependent polarimet-ric observations. Finally, the surface normals themselves are also propagated, which effectively denoises the surface normals on the hypothesized surface. This is essential for using quad-Bayer polarization cameras as they are inher-ently noisy. These updated surface normals are then fed back into the polarimetric cost volume, i.e., the Stokes vec-tors are updated to match the surface normals, and the whole process is iterated to convergence. We also fully model the diffuse, specular lobe, and specular spike reﬂection with a microfacet-based polarimetric BRDF model [3]. Account-ing for illumination-dependent polarization by glossy re-ﬂection in this way, which past methods ignored, is crucial for practical polarimetric 3D reconstruction.
We experimentally validate our method on a number of objects captured in a variety of lighting conditions. The re-sults demonstrate the accuracy of the recovered surface nor-mals and the method’s effectiveness in practical real-world situations. With the advent of polarization cameras, we be-lieve these results have implications in a wide range of ar-eas, including autonomous driving, robotics, VR/AR, and medicine owing to its passive reconstruction of detailed ge-ometry from a simple setup. 2.