Abstract
We introduce PREDATOR, a model for pairwise point-cloud registration with deep attention to the overlap region.
Different from previous work, our model is speciﬁcally de-signed to handle (also) point-cloud pairs with low overlap.
Its key novelty is an overlap-attention block for early infor-mation exchange between the latent encodings of the two point clouds. In this way the subsequent decoding of the latent representations into per-point features is conditioned on the respective other point cloud, and thus can predict which points are not only salient, but also lie in the overlap region between the two point clouds. The ability to focus on points that are relevant for matching greatly improves performance: PREDATOR raises the rate of successful reg-istrations by more than 20% in the low-overlap scenario, and also sets a new state of the art for the 3DMatch bench-mark with 89% registration recall. [Code release] 1.

Introduction
Recent work has made substantial progress in fully auto-matic, 3D feature-based point cloud registration. At ﬁrst glance, benchmarks like 3DMatch [49] appear to be sat-urated, with multiple state-of-the-art (SoTA) methods [16, 8, 3] reaching nearly 95% feature matching recall and suc-cessfully registering >80% of all scan pairs. One may get the impression that the registration problem is solved—but this is actually not the case. We argue that the high success rates are a consequence of lenient evaluation protocols. We have been making our task too easy: existing literature and benchmarks [5, 49, 20] consider only pairs of point clouds 30% overlap to measure performance. Yet, the low-with overlap regime is very relevant for practical applications.
On the one hand, it may be difﬁcult to ensure high overlap, for instance when moving along narrow corridors, or when closing loops in the presence of occlusions (densely built-up areas, forest, etc.). On the other hand, data acquisition is
≥
∗First two authors contributed equally to this work. a) Input point clouds b) Inferred overlap region c) Estimated registration
Figure 1: PREDATOR is designed to focus attention on the overlap region, and to prefer salient points in that region, so as to enable robust registration in spite of low overlap. often costly, so practitioners aim for a low number of scans with only the necessary overlap [45, 46].
Driven by the evaluation protocol, the high-overlap scenario became the focus of research, whereas the more challenging low-overlap examples were largely ne-glected (cf . Fig. 1). Consequently, the registration perfor-mance of even the best known methods deteriorates rapidly when the overlap between the two point clouds falls below 30%, see Fig. 2. Human operators, in contrast, can still reg-ister such low overlap point clouds without much effort.
This discrepancy is the starting point of the present work.
To study its reasons, we have constructed a low-overlap dataset 3DLoMatch from scans of the popular 3DMatch benchmark, and have analysed the individual modules/steps of the registration pipeline (Fig. 2). It turns out that the ef-fective receptive ﬁeld of fully convolutional feature point descriptors [8, 3] is local enough and the descriptors are hardly corrupted by non-overlapping parts of the scans.
Rather than coming up with yet another way to learn better descriptors, the key to registering low overlap point clouds is learning where to sample feature points. A large perfor-mance boost can be achieved if the feature points are pre-dominantly sampled from the overlapping portions of the scans (Fig. 2, right).
We follow this path and introduce PREDATOR, a neu-ral architecture for pairwise 3D point cloud registration that learns to detect the overlap region between two unregistered scans, and to focus on that region when sampling feature 14267
Figure 2: Registration with SoTA methods deteriorates rapidly for pairs with <30% overlap (left). By increasing the fraction of points sampled in the overlap region, many failures can be avoided as shown here for FCGF [8] (right). points. The main contributions of our work are:
• an analysis why existing registration pipelines break down in the low-overlap regime
• a novel overlap attention block that allows for early in-formation exchange between the two point clouds and focuses the subsequent steps on the overlap region
• a scheme to reﬁne the feature point descriptors, by con-ditioning them also on the respective other point cloud
• a novel loss function to train matchability scores, which help to sample better and more repeatable interest points
Moreover, we make available the 3DLoMatch dataset, con-taining the previously ignored scan pairs of 3DMatch that have low (10-30%) overlap. In our experiments, PREDATOR greatly outperforms existing methods in the low-overlap regime, increasing registration recall by >10 percent points.
It also sets a new state of the art for the conventional 3DMatch benchmark, reaching a registration recall of 89%. 2.