Abstract
We study a very challenging task, human image com-pletion, which tries to recover the human body part with a reasonable human shape from the corrupted region. Since each human body part is unique, it is infeasible to restore the missing part by borrowing textures from other visible re-gions. Thus, we propose two types of learned priors to com-pensate for the damaged region. One is a structure prior, it uses a human parsing map to represent the human body structure. The other is a structure-texture correlation prior.
It learns a structure and a texture memory bank, which en-codes the common body structures and texture patterns, re-spectively. With the aid of these memory banks, the model could utilize the visible pattern to query and fetch a sim-ilar structure and texture pattern to introduce additional reasonable structures and textures for the corrupted region.
Besides, since multiple potential human shapes are under-lying the corrupted region, we propose multi-scale structure discriminators to further restore a plausible topological structure. Experiments on various large-scale benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method. (a) Cover the repeated region  (DeepFill v2) (b) Cover the human part (DeepFill v2)
Structure
Texture (c) Cover the human part (Ours)
Figure 1. Illustration of the human body completion. (a) Existing image inpainting methods [48] usually works well to recover these repeated regions, (b) while they might fail to recover the unique human body region. (c) We mainly focus on how to recover the corrupted unique human body in the image via borrowing structure and texture information of other images from the learned mem-ory. With the help of additional prior information, our proposed method could generate a more realistic and plausible image. 1.

Introduction
Human image completion aims to repair human body parts in the corrupted human image. It has various potential applications, including the restoration of old human pho-tographs and ﬁlms, human image re-composition, and fash-ion clothing re-editing.
By far, most image inpainting works [27, 45, 33, 44] make the best use of the repeated textures in visible regions, such as the attention mechanism [47], to restore a photo-† Corresponding author realistic image from the damaged part. Since there are both human body and background in corrupted regions, and they usually have the different style of textures, it is ambiguous to place the repeated textures into the right position. Thus, following works [11, 54, 10, 32] take an additional human mask as guidance to ease the texture ambiguities between foreground and background. However, since each human body part is unique (only one head), it is impracticable to borrow the repeated textures from other parts. Besides, a human body is non-rigid with diverse poses, and thereby multiple potential human shapes exist for the damaged re-7951
gion. This ambiguity could further make the inpaintor pro-duce a terrible result with unreasonable human body struc-ture. As shown in Figure 1 (a), the existing method usually works well to repair the corrupted area from the visible re-peated texture, such as the sand. While when dealing with the unique human body part, such as the arm in Figure 1 (b), it produces a result with an implausible human body structure.
Fortunately, the human body is highly structured. We could make the full use of the structure information of a human body to guide the network to generate decent results with reasonable human shapes. There are sev-eral types of human structures, including a binary fore-ground/background mask [3, 20], 2D pose [6, 34], hu-man parsing [38, 39], densepose [1, 25], and 3D body mesh [2, 13, 21]. From left to right, they have a more power-ful capability in representing the structure in detail but with more difﬁculties for their corresponding structure estimator to infer an accuracy structure from a corrupted image. We use the human parsing as a human structure prior, consider-ing the trade-off between the representative ability and the accuracy of its estimator in a corrupted image [30].
By leveraging the structure prior, we ﬁrst learn a struc-ture and a texture memory bank, encoding the common body structure and texture patterns, respectively. To learn more representative features for both the structure and tex-ture, the memory prior encoding network takes the concate-nation of structure and texture as the input. Then, we pro-pose to estimate the human parsing map of the corrupted image and recover a reasonable complete human parsing map with the help of the structure memory bank. To further eliminate the shape ambiguities underlying in corrupted re-gions and produce an image with a more plausible topo-logical structure, we also use multi-scale structure discrim-inators to regularize the connections at different scales of topological levels to be reasonable, such as the global level (the whole body), the middle level (upper body), and the lo-cal level (arm-with-torso). In this way, we could recover a semantic plausibly structure map.
Conditioned on the recovered complete structure map, we propose a texture completion module to restore the hu-man body textures in the corrupted regions. Since the tex-ture of each human body part is unique, it is infeasible for the incomplete area to borrow the repeated textures from the visible regions directly or with the advanced attentional mechanism [47]. We further propose a structure-texture correlation prior to introduce additional plausible textures for the corrupt region. Speciﬁcally, the texture comple-tion model could retrieve a reasonable texture pattern from the texture memory bank as a compensation for the incom-plete region corresponding to its complete structure. Also, to preserve the identity of the visible part, we use skip-connections between encoding features and memory fea-tures. As shown in Figure 1 (c), our method could recover the human body part from the corrupted regions with a plau-sible human body structure.
We summarize our contributions as follows: (i) Different from previous image inpainting works, we focus on recov-ering the unique human body part from the incomplete re-gion with a plausible human body structure; (ii) To further produce an image with a reasonable topological structure in the human body, we propose to use multi-scale structure discriminators to regularize the connection among all the topological levels; (iii) We propose a structure and texture memory bank to introduce more additional priors as com-pensation for the corrupted region. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method. 2.