Abstract
Recent works on localization and mapping from privacy preserving line features have made signiﬁcant progress to-wards addressing the privacy concerns arising from cloud-based solutions in mixed reality and robotics. The require-ment for calibrated cameras is a fundamental limitation for these approaches, which prevents their application in many crowd-sourced mapping scenarios. In this paper, we pro-pose a solution to the uncalibrated privacy preserving lo-calization and mapping problem. Our approach simulta-neously recovers the intrinsic and extrinsic calibration of a camera from line-features only. This enables uncalibrated devices to both localize themselves within an existing map as well as contribute to the map, while preserving the pri-vacy of the image contents. Furthermore, we also derive a solution to bootstrapping maps from scratch using only un-calibrated devices. Our approach provides comparable per-formance to the calibrated scenario and the privacy com-promising alternatives based on traditional point features. 1.

Introduction
The recent trend towards cloud-based localization and mapping systems for mixed reality and robotics (e.g., Microsoft Azure Spatial Anchors [25], Facebook
LiveMaps [1], or Google VPS [48]) is largely driven by the need for scalable solutions to enable multi-device ex-periences and crowd-sourced mapping. However, as these systems primarily rely on acquiring imagery of the environ-ment, this development has raised signiﬁcant privacy con-cerns by the public [27, 44, 49, 62]. Existing works on pri-vacy preserving localization and mapping are based on the concept of lifting traditional point-based features to lines to conceal the appearance of images [10, 13, 55, 57, 58].
The fundamental limitation of these existing works is that they assume calibrated cameras, which prevents their applicability in a wide range of scenarios. In practice, the intrinsic calibration of cameras used in mixed reality de-vices and robots continuously changes over time due to en-vironmental impact such as temperature change or dropping
Figure 1: Our method jointly estimates absolute pose and focal length of uncalibrated cameras from privacy preserving line fea-tures. We also present a solution for bootstrapping maps from scratch using four views. the device. Re-calibration of devices by the manufacturer is typically very costly or technically very challenging using automatic techniques. Sometimes, it can even be desirable to hide the exact calibration parameters of a camera to pro-tect the identity of the device from ﬁngerprinting attacks.
Due to these issues, the resulting changes to the calibra-tion parameters can be quite dramatic and negatively inﬂu-ence the accuracy of camera localization and mapping, or even prevent the successful use of the data entirely. Fur-thermore, in crowd-sourced mapping scenarios from mobile cameras [2, 53, 54, 56], prior focal length estimates are typi-cally quite inaccurate (e.g., due to auto-focus) or completely incorrect due to manual editing of the imagery by the user.
Recent interest in crowd-sourced mapping for autonomous driving from dashboard cameras [63] is another application that suffers from challenges to calibrate the cameras. The windshield acts as an additional lens and drastically impacts the effective calibration parameters of the acquired imagery.
In this paper, we propose a principled solution to privacy preserving localization from uncalibrated cameras. Our ap-proach self-calibrates the focal length and jointly estimates the absolute pose of a camera from only privacy preserving line features. Successfully localized cameras can contribute to existing maps in an incremental fashion without any fur-ther assumptions. In addition, we present a solution to ini-tializing maps from scratch from only uncalibrated cameras.
Our boostrapping approach requires a subset of consistently aligned lines similar to the work presented by Geppert et al. [13]. This assumption does not impact the amount of 1809
privacy preservation. We demonstrate the efﬁcacy of our ap-proach on a wide range of experiments on localization and the scenario of end-to-end crowd-sourced mapping. Our method achieves comparable performance to the calibrated case and to traditional point-based approaches.
The content in the paper is organized as follows: we
ﬁrst review related methods in the context of our work in
Sec. 2 before describing our proposed solution to camera localization with unknown focal length from line features in
Sec. 3.1. Sec. 3.2 then describes our approach to initializing maps from uncalibrated cameras, while Sec. 4 experimen-tally validates the efﬁcacy of our proposed methods. 2.