Abstract
Many computer vision systems require users to upload im-age features to the cloud for processing and storage. These features can be exploited to recover sensitive information about the scene or subjects, e.g., by reconstructing the ap-pearance of the original image. To address this privacy concern, we propose a new privacy-preserving feature repre-sentation. The core idea of our work is to drop constraints from each feature descriptor by embedding it within an afﬁne subspace containing the original feature as well as adver-sarial feature samples. Feature matching on the privacy-preserving representation is enabled based on the notion of subspace-to-subspace distance. We experimentally demon-strate the effectiveness of our method and its high practical relevance for the applications of visual localization and mapping as well as face authentication. Compared to the original features, our approach makes it signiﬁcantly more difﬁcult for an adversary to recover private information. 1.

Introduction
Image feature extraction and matching are two funda-mental steps in many computer vision applications, such as 3D reconstruction [1, 2], image retrieval [1, 3], or face recognition [4]. Image features can be categorized into low-level [1, 5], mid-level [3, 6] or high-level [7, 8] depending on their information content and receptive ﬁeld. Furthermore, features can be hand-crafted or learned using data-driven techniques. However, they are almost always represented as vectors in high-dimensional feature spaces. Multiple fea-ture vectors are then compared using appropriate distance metrics, which forms the basis of nearest neighbor search or other retrieval and recognition techniques.
Recently, there has been rapid progress in feature inver-sion methods that reconstruct the image appearance from fea-tures extracted in the original image [9, 10, 11, 12] as shown in Figure 1. This raises serious privacy concerns, since im-ages may contain sensitive information about the scene or subjects. Increased awareness of these privacy issues has spurred signiﬁcant efforts to develop privacy-preserving ma-chine learning systems. In recent years, researchers have
Figure 1: Privacy-Preserving Image Features. Inversion of traditional local image features is a privacy concern in many applications. Our proposed approach obfuscates the appearance of the original image by lifting the descriptors to afﬁne subspaces. Distance between the privacy-preserving subspaces enables efﬁcient matching of features. The same concept can be applied to other domains such as face fea-tures for biometric authentication. Image credit: laylam-oran4battersea (Layla Moran). proposed a large body of approaches to tackle the various aspects of the problem, including homomorphic cryptosys-tems [13], differential privacy [14], federated learning [15], and speciﬁc solutions for camera localization [16, 17].
In this paper, we propose a new feature representation suitable for visual recognition and matching tasks that makes it signiﬁcantly more difﬁcult for an adversary to reconstruct the image contents. Our approach has only marginal compu-tational overhead, which makes it amenable to a wide range of practical scenarios. The core idea behind our method is to represent a descriptor point in Rn as an afﬁne subspace of Rn passing through the original point. We refer to this process as lifting. The chosen dimension of the subspace determines a trade-off between accuracy, runtime, and the level of privacy of the feature representation. To make inverting the repre-sentation difﬁcult, we propose a strategy for constructing a lifted subspace containing additional adversarial feature points. We empirically demonstrate strong privacy preser-vation even for low-dimensional afﬁne subspaces. Pairwise 14267
feature comparison is a fundamental step required in many recognition tasks. In our proposed framework, such com-parisons are done directly on the lifted subspaces based on either point-to-subspace or subspace-to-subspace distance.
The paper is organized as follows. First, we formally present the idea of lifting and the technique for matching lifted features. Next, we analyze the performance of these features for two applications: a) image matching for visual localization and mapping as well as b) face authentication.
Finally, we demonstrate that our proposed representation is resilient to potential privacy attacks. The code of our method and the evaluation protocol will be released as open-source. 2.