Abstract
We present QuantumSync, the ﬁrst quantum algorithm for solving a synchronization problem in the context of com-puter vision. In particular, we focus on permutation syn-chronization which involves solving a non-convex optimiza-tion problem in discrete variables. We start by formulating synchronization into a quadratic unconstrained binary opti-mization problem (QUBO). While such formulation respects the binary nature of the problem, ensuring that the result is a set of permutations requires extra care. Hence, we: (i) show how to insert permutation constraints into a QUBO problem and (ii) solve the constrained QUBO problem on the current generation of the adiabatic quantum computers
D-Wave. Thanks to the quantum annealing, we guarantee global optimality with high probability while sampling the energy landscape to yield conﬁdence estimates. Our proof-of-concepts realization on the adiabatic D-Wave computer demonstrates that quantum machines offer a promising way to solve the prevalent yet difﬁcult synchronization problems. 1.

Introduction
Computer vision literature accommodates a myriad of efﬁcient and effective methods for processing rich informa-tion from widely available 2D and 3D cameras. Many algo-rithms at our disposal excel at processing single frames or sequence of images such as videos [82, 34, 13]. Oftentimes, a scene can be observed by multiple cameras, from differ-ent, usually unknown viewpoints. To this date it remains an open question how to consistently combine the multi-view cues acquired without respecting any particular order [44].
Synchronization [91, 42, 92] is one of the proposed solu-tions to the aforementioned problem. On an abstract note, it involves distributing the discrepancies over the graph con-necting multiple viewpoints such that the estimates are con-sistent across all considered nodes. To this end, synchro-nization simultaneously averages the pairwise local infor-mation into a global one [48, 54, 4, 12]. This procedure is a fundamental piece of most state-of-the-art multi-view
⋆ both authors contributed equally to this work
Figure 1. Overview of QuantumSync. QuantumSync formulates permutation synchronization as a QUBO and embeds its logical instance on a quantum computer. After running multiple anneals, it selects the lowest energy solution as the global optimum. reconstruction and multi-shape analysis pipelines [85, 23, 25] because it heavy-lifts the global constraint satisfaction while respecting the geometry of the parameters. In fact, most of the multiview-consistent inference problems can be expressed as some form of a synchronization [107, 15].
In this paper, our focus is permutation synchronization, where the edges of the graph are labeled by permutation matrices denoting the correspondences either between two 2D images or two 3D shapes. Speciﬁcally, we seek to ﬁnd an absolute ordering for each point of each frame which sorts all the corresponding points into the same bin. Un-fortunately, this problem by deﬁnition involves a combi-natorial non-convex optimization, for which attaining the global minimum is intractable under standard formulations targeting classical von Neumann computers. This difﬁculty have encouraged scholars to seek continuous relaxations for which either a good local optimum [14, 16] or a closed form solution [6, 57, 5] could be found. The solution to this approximately equivalent relaxed problem should then be rounded back to the permutation matrices to report a valid result. Ideally, we would like to avoid such approximations and work with the original set of constraints at hand. This is exactly what we propose to do in this work. Because on a classical computer we cannot speak of a global optimality guarantee of our discrete problem, we turn our attention to a new family of processors, i.e., quantum computers. 13122
A quantum computer is a computing machine which takes advantage of quantum effects such as quantum su-perposition, entanglement, tunnelling and contextuality to solve problems notoriously difﬁcult (i.e., N P-hard) on a classical computer. Numerous quantum algorithms have demonstrated improved computational complexity ﬁnally reaching the desired supremacy [7]. Currently, we see the
ﬁrst practical uses of quantum computers thanks to the pro-grammable quantum processing units (QPU) available to the research community such as D-Wave [2] or IBM [1]. As this new generation of computers offers a completely differ-ent computing paradigm, directly porting classical problem formulations is far from being trivial. In fact, oftentimes we are required to revise the problem at hand altogether [49].
This paper shows how to formulate the classical per-mutation synchronization in terms of a quadratic uncon-strained binary optimization (QUBO) that is quantum com-puter friendly. QUBO optimizes for binary variables and not permutations, and, hence, we are required to ensure that permutation constraints are respected during optimization.
To this end, we turn all constraints into linear ones and in-corporate them into QUBO. Finally, we embed our problem to a real quantum computer and show that it is highly likely to achieve the lowest energy solution, the global optimum (see Fig. 1). Our contributions are as follows: 1. The ﬁrst, to the best of our knowledge, formulation of the classical synchronization in a form consumable by an adiabatic quantum computer (AQC); 2. We show how to introduce permutations as linear con-straints into the QUBO problem; 3. We numerically verify the validity of our formulation in simulated experiments as well as on a real AQC (for the ﬁrst time, on D-Wave Advantage 1.1); 4. We perform extensive ablation studies giving insights into this new way of computing.
We obtain highly probable global optima up to either of: (i) eight views and three points per view, (ii) seven views with four points, or (iii) ﬁve points with three views. We experiment for the ﬁrst time on an AQC with 5k qubits and perform extensive evaluations and comparisons to classical methods. Our approach can also be classiﬁed as the ﬁrst method for quantum matching of multiple point sets. While we are the ﬁrst to implement synchronization on quantum hardware, our evaluations and tests are proof of concepts as truly practical quantum computing is still a leap away. 2.