Abstract
Similarity learning has been recognized as a crucial step for object tracking. However, existing multiple object track-ing methods only use sparse ground truth matching as the training objective, while ignoring the majority of the infor-mative regions on the images. In this paper, we present
Quasi-Dense Similarity Learning, which densely samples hundreds of region proposals on a pair of images for con-trastive learning. We can directly combine this similarity learning with existing detection methods to build Quasi-Dense Tracking (QDTrack) without turning to displacement regression or motion priors. We also ﬁnd that the resulting distinctive feature space admits a simple nearest neighbor search at the inference time. Despite its simplicity, QD-Track outperforms all existing methods on MOT, BDD100K,
Waymo, and TAO tracking benchmarks. It achieves 68.7
MOTA at 20.3 FPS on MOT17 without using external train-ing data. Compared to methods with similar detectors, it boosts almost 10 points of MOTA and signiﬁcantly de-creases the number of ID switches on BDD100K and Waymo datasets. Our code and trained models are available at https://github.com/SysCV/qdtrack. 1.

Introduction
Multiple Object Tracking (MOT) is a fundamental and challenging problem in computer vision, widely used in safety monitoring, autonomous driving, video analytics, and other applications. Contemporary MOT methods [2,4,44,45, 54] mainly follow the tracking-by-detection paradigm [36].
That is, they detect objects on each frame and then associate them according to the estimated instance similarity. Recent works [2, 4, 5, 54] show that if the detected objects are ac-curate, the spatial proximity between objects in consecutive frames, measured by Interaction of Unions (IoUs) or center distances, is a strong prior to associate the objects. However, this location heuristic only works well in simple scenarios.
If the objects are occluded or the scenes are crowded, this
Det /
GT
Sparse 
ID cls
Det
Sparse 
ID cls (a) Separate sparse ID classification (b) Joint sparse ID classification 
Det
Sparse 
Triple
Sparse 
Triplet
Det
Det
Quasi-dense
Quasi-dense
Det (c) Joint sparse triplet loss (d) Joint quasi-dense matching
Figure 1: (a) Traditional ReID model that decouples with detector and learns with sparse ID loss; (b) joint learning
ReID model with sparse ID loss; (c) joint learning ReID model with sparse triplet loss; (d) our quasi-dense similarity learning. location heuristic can easily lead to mistakes. To remedy this problem, some methods introduce motion estimation [7, 30] or displacement regression [10, 35, 54] to ensure accurate distance estimation.
However, object appearance similarity usually takes a secondary role [26, 45] to strengthen object association or re-identify vanished objects. The search region is constrained to be local neighborhoods to avoid distractions because the appearance features can not effectively distinguish differ-ent objects. On the contrary, humans can easily associate the identical objects only through appearance. We conjec-ture this is because the image and object information is not fully utilized for learning object similarity. As shown in Fig-ure 1, previous methods regard instance similarity learning as a post hoc stage after object detection or only use sparse ground truth bounding boxes as training samples [45]. These processes ignore the majority of the regions proposed on the images. Because objects in an image are rarely iden-164
tical to each other, if the object representation is properly learned, a nearest neighbor search in the embedding space should associate and distinguish instances without bells and whistles.
We observe that besides the ground truths and detected bounding boxes, which sparsely distribute on the images, many possible object regions can provide valuable training supervision. They are either close to the ground truth bound-ing boxes to provide more positive training examples or in the background as negative examples. In this paper, we pro-pose quasi-dense similarity learning, which densely matches hundreds of regions of interest on a pair of images for con-trastive learning. The quasi-dense samples can cover most of the informative regions on the images, providing both more box examples and hard negatives.
Because one sample has more than one positive samples on the reference image, we extend the contrastive learn-ing [12, 39, 47] to multiple positive forms that makes the quasi-dense learning feasible. Each sample is thus trained to distinguish all proposals on the other image simultaneously.
This contrast provides stronger supervision than using only the handful ground truth labels and enhances the instance similarity learning.
The inference process, which maintains the matching can-didates and measures the instance similarity, also plays an important role in the tracking performance. Besides similar-ity, MOT also needs to consider false positives, id switches, new appeared objects, and terminated tracks. To tackle the missing targets with our similarity metric, we include back-drops, the unmatched objects in the last frame, for matching and use bi-directional softmax to enforce the bi-directional consistency. The objects that do not have matching targets will lack the consistency thus has low similarity scores to any objects. To track the multiple targets, we also conduct duplicate removal to ﬁlter the matching candidates.
Quasi-dense similarity learning can be easily used with most existing detectors since generating region of interests is widely used in object detection algorithms. In this paper, we apply our method to Faster R-CNN [37] along with a lightweight embedding extractor and residual networks [15] and build Quasi-Dense Tracking (QDTrack) models. We con-duct extensive experiments on MOT [28], BDD100K [51],
Waymo [41], and TAO [8] tracking benchmarks. Despite its simplicity, QDTrack outperforms all existing methods with-out bells and whistles. It achieves 68.7 MOTA on MOT17 at 20.3 FPS without using external training data. More-over, it boosts almost 10 points of MOTA and signiﬁcantly decreases the number of ID switches on BDD100K and
Waymo datasets, establishing solid records on these brand-new large-scale benchmarks. QDTrack allows end-to-end training, thereby simplifying the training and testing proce-dures of multi-object tracking frameworks. The simplicity and effectiveness shall beneﬁt further research. 2.