Abstract
Point cloud registration is a common step in many 3D computer vision tasks such as object pose estimation, where a 3D model is aligned to an observation. Classical regis-tration methods generalize well to novel domains but fail when given a noisy observation or a bad initialization.
Learning-based methods, in contrast, are more robust but lack in generalization capacity. We propose to consider it-erative point cloud registration as a reinforcement learn-ing task and, to this end, present a novel registration agent (ReAgent). We employ imitation learning to initialize its discrete registration policy based on a steady expert pol-icy. Integration with policy optimization, based on our pro-posed alignment reward, further improves the agent’s reg-istration performance. We compare our approach to classi-cal and learning-based registration methods on both Mod-elNet40 (synthetic) and ScanObjectNN (real data) and show that our ReAgent achieves state-of-the-art accuracy. The lightweight architecture of the agent, moreover, enables re-duced inference time as compared to related approaches.
Code is available at github.com/dornik/reagent. 1.

Introduction
Depending on the application domain, point cloud reg-istration methods need to fulﬁll a range of properties. For example, AR applications and robotics applications require real-time inference speed and robustness to unexpected ob-servations. In such real-world deployment, generalization to categories that were not seen during training is required.
Further, registration approaches also need to generalize to different tasks, such as object pose estimation or scan align-ment. Finally, an interaction with or scrutiny by a human might be required. For this, the method’s steps need to be interpretable. These properties are often competing and thus difﬁcult to achieve using a single approach.
As diverse as the required properties are the approaches that are proposed to solve point cloud registration. Dis-tinctive features of proposed methods are global [28, 30]
Figure 1: Iterative registration using ReAgent. The source point cloud (cyan) is aligned to the target point cloud (gray), starting from an initial source (magenta). ReAgent follows policy π by taking action ai = arg maxa π(a|Oi) given the current observation Oi, improving registration step-by-step. or local optimality [3], as well as one-shot [24] or iterative computation [1]. Global considerations allow for greater robustness to initial conditions than local methods, albeit at the cost of signiﬁcantly increased computation time. While iterative methods may achieve higher accuracy than one-shot approaches through repeated registration, they may di-verge over multiple steps. Furthermore, learning-based ap-proaches are proposed in related work [24, 1, 25, 5], which are shown to be more robust to initialization and noise than classical approaches. However, these methods are not ro-bust to domain change, e.g., when transferred to novel tasks.
In an effort to bridge this performance gap between methods, we design a novel registration approach that uni-ﬁes accuracy, robustness to noise and initialization with in-ference speed. While reinforcement learning methods for
RGB-based object pose reﬁnement are proposed [22, 4], to the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to consider 3D point cloud registration as a reinforcement learning prob-lem. Our approach is based on a combination of Imitation
Learning (IL) and Reinforcement Learning (RL); imitating an expert to learn an accurate initial policy, reinforcing a symmetry-invariant reward to further improve the policy. 14586
As illustrated in Figure 1, the proposed registration agent (ReAgent) treats registration as an iterative classiﬁcation of the observed point cloud pair into discrete steps. In sum-mary, we
• combine imitation and reinforcement learning for ac-curate and robust point cloud registration,
• propose a lightweight agent for fast inference and in-terpretability using iterative discrete actions and
• improve accuracy compared to state-of-the-art meth-ods on synthetic and real datasets, while reducing in-ference time compared to related approaches.
We discuss related point cloud registration and reinforce-ment learning methods in Section 2. Section 3 presents the proposed registration agent. Section 4 provides experiments on synthetic and real data. The impact of the presented con-tributions is discussed in Section 5. Section 6 concludes the paper. Additional details and results on the related object pose estimation task are found in the supplement. 2.