Abstract
In this paper, we introduce the new task of reconstruct-ing 3D human pose from a single image in which we can see the person and the person’s image through a mirror.
Compared to general scenarios of 3D pose estimation from a single view, the mirror reﬂection provides an additional view for resolving the depth ambiguity. We develop an optimization-based approach that exploits mirror symme-try constraints for accurate 3D pose reconstruction. We also provide a method to estimate the surface normal of the mirror from vanishing points in the single image. To validate the proposed approach, we collect a large-scale dataset named Mirrored-Human, which covers a large vari-ety of human subjects, poses and backgrounds. The experi-ments demonstrate that, when trained on Mirrored-Human with our reconstructed 3D poses as pseudo ground-truth, the accuracy and generalizability of existing single-view 3D pose estimators can be largely improved. The code and dataset are available at https://zju3dv.github. io/Mirrored-Human/. 1.

Introduction 3D human pose estimation has ubiquitous applications in sport analysis, human-computer interaction, and ﬁtness and dance teaching. While there has been remarkable progress in 3D pose estimation from a monocular image or video [22, 37, 25, 24, 59], inevitable challenges such as the depth ambiguity and the self-occlusion are still unsolved.
In many scenes like dancing rooms and gyms, people are often in front of a mirror. In this case, we are able to see the person and his/her mirror image simultaneously. The mirror image actually provides an additional virtual view of the person, which can resolve the single-view depth ambiguity if the mirror is properly placed. Moreover, unseen part of the person can also be observed from the mirror image, so that the occlusion problem can be alleviated.
In this paper, we investigate the feasibility of leveraging such mirror images to improve the accuracy of 3D human
*Equal Contribution. †Corresponding author.
Input image
SMPLify-X [42] 3D visualization of our (left) and SMPLify-X (right) results
Figure 1: While the state-of-the-art single-view 3D pose estima-tor [42] yields a small reprojection error, the recovered 3D poses may be erroneous due to the depth ambiguity. We make use of the mirror in the image to resolve the ambiguity and reconstruct more accurate human pose as well as the mirror geometry. pose estimation. We develop an optimization-based frame-work with mirror symmetry constraints that are applicable without knowing the mirror geometry and camera parame-ters. We also provide a method to utilize the properties of vanishing points to recover the mirror normal along with the camera parameters, so that an additional mirror normal con-straint can be imposed to further improve the human pose estimation accuracy. The effectiveness of our framework is validated on a new dataset for this new task with 3D pose ground-truth provided by a multi-view camera system.
An important application of the proposed approach is to generate pseudo ground-truth annotations to train existing 3D pose estimators. To this end, we collect a large-scale set of Internet images that contain people and mirrors and generate 3D pose annotations with the proposed optimiza-tion method. The dataset is named Mirrored-Human. Com-pared with existing 3D human pose datasets [19, 33, 56] that are captured with very few subjects and background scenes, Mirrored-Human has a signiﬁcantly larger diversity 12814
in human poses, appearances and backgrounds, as shown in
Fig. 7. The experiments show that, by combining Mirrored-Human with existing datasets as training data, both ac-curacy and generalizability of existing 3D pose estima-tion methods can be signiﬁcantly improved for both single-person and multi-person cases.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
• We introduce a new task of reconstructing human pose from a single image in which we can see the person and the person’s mirror image.
• We develop a novel optimization-based framework with mirror symmetry constraints to solve this new task, as well as a method to recover mirror geometry from a single image.
• We collect a large-scale dataset named Mirrored-Human from the Internet, provide our reconstructed 3D poses as pseudo ground-truth, and show that train-ing on this new dataset can improve the performance of existing 3D human pose estimators. 2.