Abstract
Data augmentation is an effective regularization strategy to alleviate the overﬁtting, which is an inherent drawback of the deep neural networks. However, data augmentation is rarely considered for point cloud processing despite many studies proposing various augmentation methods for image data. Actually, regularization is essential for point clouds since lack of generality is more likely to occur in point cloud due to small datasets. This paper proposes a Rigid Subset
Mix (RSMix)1, a novel data augmentation method for point clouds that generates a virtual mixed sample by replac-ing part of the sample with shape-preserved subsets from another sample. RSMix preserves structural information of the point cloud sample by extracting subsets from each sample without deformation using a neighboring function.
The neighboring function was carefully designed consider-ing unique properties of point cloud, unordered structure and non-grid. Experiments veriﬁed that RSMix successfully regularized the deep neural networks with remarkable im-provement for shape classiﬁcation. We also analyzed var-ious combinations of data augmentations including RSMix with single and multi-view evaluations, based on abundant ablation studies. 1.

Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved outstanding perfor-mances in various ﬁelds regardless of the data domains, such as image, video, speech, and point cloud. In partic-ular, three-dimensional (3D) point cloud processing is at-tracting considerable interest following the pioneering net-work PointNet [22] development, since point clouds can be applied directly to deep learning without preprocessing.
Although various tasks have been successfully addressed using point clouds, such as 3D object shape classiﬁcation and part segmentation, inherent drawback of deep learning is still less considered in the point cloud domain. Due to 1Project page: https:// github.com/ dogyoonlee/ RSMix
Figure 1: Qualitative results with RSMix. Purple (left) and yellow (middle) colored points indicate Rigid Subsets to be extracted from each sample to synthesize red and green col-ored mixed samples (right). the typical nature of deep neural networks (DNNs) that ap-proximates the model from the given data distribution, the trained model tends to be overﬁtted regardless of the data domain. This lack of generality is a fundamental deep learn-ing problem. One way to alleviate overﬁtting and generalize the model is data augmentation, which improves diversity of the training data.
Various data augmentation methods have been recently proposed in the image domain as network regularization strategies, but data augmentation for point clouds has only rarely been considered. Actually, regularization is essential for point clouds since it is easier to be biased to the distribu-tion of training samples than that of image. That is largely because point cloud datasets [31, 2, 6] are typically consid-erably smaller and less diverse than image datasets, such as
ImageNet [7] and MSCOCO [20], which have millions of training data. For example, ModelNet40 [31], one of the 15900
most widely used point cloud dataset, includes only 12,311 models with 40 categories. Therefore, it is essential to im-prove the generality of models for point cloud.
In the image domain, regional dropout [38, 25, 10, 8] and mixup-based methods [34, 28, 33, 14, 11] have been pro-posed as data augmentation strategies, which are different to conventional methods, to generate virtual training sam-ples. These methods are designed to improve generality of the neural network, preventing the model from being sig-niﬁcantly affected by only small part of the sample that has discriminative characteristics by eliminating or mixing the part of the data. However, it is difﬁcult to apply this intu-ition directly to the point clouds due to two inherent prop-erties of point cloud: non-grid and order-invariance. Al-though Chen et al. [4] applied the concept of Mixup [34] to point clouds handling the properties of point cloud with linear interpolation based on optimal assignment, generated samples lost the structural information of the original sam-ple due to distortion.
This paper proposes Rigid Subset Mix (RSMix), the shape-preserving data augmentation method for point clouds that can partially mix two samples, preserving the partial shapes of the original samples. We redeﬁne the con-cept of mask region from image analysis and adapt it to 3D space to extract parts from each sample while preserving structural information of the point cloud. We also deﬁne a
Rigid Subset (RS) derived from the redeﬁned mask region, a group of adjacent points within a certain distance from a speciﬁc query point using a neighboring function to address unique characteristics: unordered structure and non-grid. In contrast to PointMixup [4], we can utilize structural infor-mation of the original point cloud sample intactly by using
RS. In addition, we designed RS scale to vary, to improve diversity of the training sample, and hence increase regu-larization effects. Furthermore, RSMix can be used in con-junction with the existing data augmentation since it utilizes the part of the given data intactly. In the end, by introducing
RS, we can improve generality of DNNs and give attention them to recognize parts of the object. In Section 3.2, we describe in detail how to generate the virtual sample pre-serving shape of the source sample by extracting RS. In ad-vance, we provide visualized RS samples to be extracted and resultant mixed samples in Figure 1.
We provide the experimental results for shape classi-ﬁcation on ModelNet40 [31] and ModelNet10 [31] with the most representative DNN approaches [23, 29] for point clouds. RSMix successfully improved the network perfor-mance, outperforming the existing data augmentation meth-ods. Moreover, abundant ablation studies for various com-binations of existing data augmentation and RSMix veriﬁed that RSMix improved the model regardless of which con-ventional data augmentation method was employed.
Meanwhile, we analyzed the experimental results with respect to two evaluation mechanisms to ensure fair com-parisons. In fact, although the evaluation methods of shape classiﬁcation on point cloud are divided into two ways: sin-gle and multi-view, many studies present their experimental results without clearly specifying their mechanism. This makes hard to quantitatively compare results among stud-ies. Our experiments show that the results evaluated by single and multi-view approaches have signiﬁcant differ-ences. Therefore, it is essential to analyze experimental re-sults along the evaluation methods. Sections 4.2 presents analysis with single and multi-view approaches based on ablation studies.
To summarize, this paper provides the following major contributions.
• Shape preserving augmentation. We propose new data augmentation method for point clouds that mixes train-ing samples with preserved structures by using Rigid
Subset (RS).
• Signiﬁcant improvement. The proposed method re-markably improves DNN performances and robustness for shape classiﬁcation and outperforms existing data augmentation strategies.
• Complementary method. RSMix can be used in con-junction with other data augmentation approaches.
Abundant ablation studies verify that RSMix can be combined well with other augmentations and further improves the target model. 2.