Abstract
Although vanilla Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based detectors can achieve satisfactory performance on fake face detection, we observe that the detectors tend to seek forgeries on a limited region of face, which re-veals that the detectors is short of understanding of forgery.
Therefore, we propose an attention-based data augmenta-tion framework to guide detector reﬁne and enlarge its at-tention. Speciﬁcally, our method tracks and occludes the
Top-N sensitive facial regions, encouraging the detector to mine deeper into the regions ignored before for more rep-resentative forgery. Especially, our method is simple-to-use and can be easily integrated with various CNN mod-els. Extensive experiments show that the detector trained with our method is capable to separately point out the representative forgery of fake faces generated by differ-ent manipulation techniques, and our method enables a vanilla CNN-based detector to achieve state-of-the-art per-formance without structure modiﬁcation. Our code is avail-able at https://github.com/crywang/RFM . 1.

Introduction
The rapid development of face manipulation technology makes the manufacture of fake face more accessible than before, which further accelerates the spread of fake facial images on social media [2, 3, 33, 34]. Meanwhile, advanced techniques make it extremely difﬁcult for human to distin-guish between real and fake face [5, 11], raising constant concerns about the credibility of digital content [26, 27, 30].
To mitigate the toll that manipulation technology takes on society, Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is widely used to construct detector for fake face detection [35].
Unfortunately, although vanilla CNN-based fake face de-tector can achieve satisfactory detection performance [28, 35], it may have a different understanding of forgery against that of humans. Concretely, the experiment in Section 4.5 shows that vanilla CNN-based detector tends to check forg-eries from a limited region of face, while humans usually
ﬁnd representative forgery over the entire face. For exam-Figure 1. Comparison of detectors trained with traditional strat-egy and with our proposed RFM. Through reﬁning training data, our method provides meaningful guidance to force a vanilla detec-tor to allocate its attention to a larger and representative facial re-gion, which greatly improves detection performance. Meanwhile, the region of interest raises a remarkable correlation to the corre-sponding manipulation technique. ple, the representative forgeries of fake face generated by
Deepfakes [2] and Face2Face [34] usually appear on the fa-cial boundary, while the representative forgeries of fake face generated by StyleGAN [16] and PGGAN [15] are located in the entire face ﬂexibly (shown in Figure 2).
For better detection, detectors should allocate more at-tention to the forgeries which can signiﬁcantly represent the corresponding manipulation technique, rather than overﬁt-ting the forgeries which are mainly useful in minimizing the bi-classiﬁcation loss function on training set. Recent re-markable breakthroughs [6, 8, 11, 13, 22, 40, 36, 38, 24] address this problem to some extent, which generally fol-low three directions: a) Through extracting the digital ﬁn-gerprints produced by the defect of manipulation technique, some works [24, 36, 38, 40] achieve advanced general-ization performance on CNN-generated facial images; b)
Some works [6, 8] divide face into multiple patches and detect them independently, which compulsively optimizes the receptive ﬁeld of detectors on fake face. c) With well-designed training dataset, some works [11, 13, 22] lever-14923
2.