Abstract
Text segmentation is a prerequisite in many real-world text-related tasks, e.g., text style transfer, and scene text re-moval. However, facing the lack of high-quality datasets and dedicated investigations, this critical prerequisite has been left as an assumption in many works, and has been largely overlooked by current research. To bridge this gap, we proposed TextSeg, a large-scale ﬁne-annotated text dataset with six types of annotations: word- and character-wise bounding polygons, masks, and transcrip-tions. We also introduce Text Reﬁnement Network (TexR-Net), a novel text segmentation approach that adapts to the unique properties of text, e.g. non-convex boundary, di-verse texture, etc., which often impose burdens on tradi-tional segmentation models.
In our TexRNet, we propose text-speciﬁc network designs to address such challenges, including key features pooling and attention-based similar-ity checking. We also introduce trimap and discriminator losses that show signiﬁcant improvement in text segmenta-tion. Extensive experiments are carried out on both our
TextSeg dataset and other existing datasets. We demon-strate that TexRNet consistently improves text segmenta-tion performance by nearly 2% compared to other state-of-the-art segmentation methods. Our dataset and code can be found at https://github.com/SHI-Labs/Rethinking-Text-Segmentation. 1.

Introduction
Text segmentation is the foundation of many text-related computer vision tasks. It has been studied for decades as one of the major research directions in computer vision, and it continuously plays an important role in many ap-plications [2, 55, 56, 47, 9]. Meanwhile, the rapid ad-vances of deep neural nets in recent years promoted all sorts of new text-related research topics, as well as new vision challenges on text. Smart applications, such as font style transfer, scene text removal, and interactive text image edit-ing, require effective text segmentation approaches to parse
Figure 1: Example images and annotations from the pro-posed TextSeg dataset. From left to right are images, word and character bounding polygons, pixel-level word (dark gray) and word-effect (light gray) masks, and pixel-level character masks. text accurately from complex scenes. Without any doubt, text segmentation is critical for industrial usages because it could upgrade the traditional text processing tools to be more intelligent and automatic, relaxing tedious efforts on manually specifying text regions.
However, modern text segmentation has been left behind in both datasets and methods. The latest public text segmen-tation challenge was in 2013-2015, hosted by ICDAR [26].
Since then, three datasets: Total-Text [10], COCO TS [5], and MLT S [6], were introduced. However, Total-Text is limited in scale, and the labeling quality in COCO TS and
MLT S needs further improvement (Figure 5). Moreover, all the three datasets contain only common scene text, dis-couraging text in other visual conditions, e.g., artistic de-sign and text effects. As a result, these datasets do not meet modern research standards, such as large-scale and
ﬁne-annotated. Thus, we propose a new text segmentation dataset: TextSeg, that collects images from a wider range of sources, including both scene and design text, and with a richer set of accurate annotations. This dataset would lead to further advancements in text segmentation research.
Additionally, text segmentation algorithms and methods 12045
Figure 2: Images examples from the proposed TextSeg dataset. The left four columns show scene text that dominantly presents in existing text segmentation datasets, and the rest columns are design text w/ or w/o text effects, which distinguishes
TextSeg from all the other related datasets. in recent years fall behind other research topics, partially due to the lack of a proper dataset. Unlike the rapid ad-vances in other segmentation research, only a few stud-ies [46, 6, 14] have brought new text segmentation ideas.
Meanwhile, these studies did not provide an intuitive com-parison with modern SOTA segmentation approaches and were unable to demonstrate their advantages over other techniques. As aforementioned, effective text segmentation models are valuable in applications. With our strong moti-vation to bridge this gap, we propose Text Reﬁnement Net-work (TexRNet), and we thoroughly exam its performance on ﬁve text segmentation datasets including the proposed
TextSeg dataset. The details of our design principles and our network structure are given in Session 3, and experi-ments and ablations studies are shown in Session 5.
In summary, the main contributions of this paper are in three-folds:
• We introduce a new large-scale ﬁne-annotated text seg-mentation dataset, TextSeg, consisting of 4,024 text images, including scene text and design text with var-ious artistic effects. TextSeg has six types of anno-tations for each image, i.e., word- and character-wise quadrilateral bounding polygons, pixel-level masks, and transcriptions. TextSeg surpasses prior datasets on these aspects: 1) more diverse text fonts/styles from di-verse sources/collections, 2) more comprehensive an-notations, and 3) more accurate segmentation masks.
• We provide a new text segmentation approach, Text
Reﬁnement Network (TexRNet), aiming to solve the unique challenges from text segmentation. We de-sign effective network modules (i.e., key features pool-ing and attention-based similarity checking) and losses (i.e., trimap loss and glyph discriminator) to tackle those challenges, e.g., diverse texture and arbitrary scales/shapes.
• Exhaustive experiments are conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed TexRNet, which out-performs SOTA on our TextSeg and on another four representative datasets. Besides, we give prospects for downstream applications that could signiﬁcantly bene-ﬁt from text segmentation. 2.