Abstract
Glass surfaces appear everywhere. Their existence can however pose a serious problem to computer vision tasks.
Recently, a method is proposed to detect glass surfaces by learning multi-scale contextual information. However, as it is only based on a general context integration operation and does not consider any speciﬁc glass surface properties, it gets confused when the images contain objects that are sim-ilar to glass surfaces and degenerates in challenging scenes with insufﬁcient contexts. We observe that humans often rely on identifying reﬂections in order to sense the existence of glass and on locating the boundary in order to deter-mine the extent of the glass. Hence, we propose a model for glass surface detection, which consists of two novel mod-ules: (1) a rich context aggregation module (RCAM) to ex-tract multi-scale boundary features from rich context fea-tures for locating glass surface boundaries of different sizes and shapes, and (2) a reﬂection-based reﬁnement module (RRM) to detect reﬂection and then incorporate it so as to differentiate glass regions from non-glass regions. In ad-dition, we also propose a challenging dataset consisting of 4,012 glass images with annotations for glass surface detec-tion. Our experiments demonstrate that the proposed model outperforms state-of-the-art methods from relevant ﬁelds. 1.

Introduction
Glass surfaces are large glass regions such as windows, glass doors and glass walls.
They are very popular and appear almost everywhere in our daily life. Although they are very useful in many ways, their existence can pose a serious problem to computer vision tasks. For example, if we are unable to detect the presence of glass surfaces, a robot or a drone may easily crash into glass surfaces. Thus, it is of vital importance to detect and separate glass surfaces from other objects for better scene understanding.
There have been some works focusing on the transpar-ent object detection problem. As transparent objects tend to have certain shapes or thicker boundaries for defract-ing light, most existing methods are based on detecting shapes [24] or boundaries via polarization [13] and explicit
† Rynson Lau is the corresponding author, and he leads this project.
Input
GT
GDNet [20] TransLab [30]
Ours
Figure 1: Two popular scenarios where existing meth-ods [20, 30] fail. GDNet [20] is based on extract-ing/integrating abundant context features for glass surface detection. As it does not consider any speciﬁc glass proper-ties, it tends to fail in scenes with insufﬁcient contexts (e.g., top row where the glass surface covers almost the whole im-age) or with glass-lookalike regions (e.g., bottom row where the center region is not covered by glass). TransLab [30] is based on a boundary-guided network for transparent object detection. It also fails to detect glass surfaces correctly. Our method, which considers reﬂections and boundaries, can ac-curately detect the glass surfaces in these complex scenes. edge supervision [30]. However, as glass surfaces typically do not process these properties, these methods developed for detecting transparent objects cannot be easily adopted to address the glass surface detection problem. Recently,
Mei et al. [20] make the ﬁrst attempt to develop the GDNet model for glass surface detection by integrating multi-level context information. While GDNet has a simple structure, it does not consider any speciﬁc properties of glass surfaces and its performance gain is mainly coming from a general context integrating structure based on dilation convolutions.
Figure 1 shows two common but challenging scenarios.
As the top image does not provide sufﬁcient boundary con-text, GDNet fails to recognize the glass surface. As the mid-dle region of the bottom image is not a glass surface but looks like one, GDNet gets confused and mis-recognizes it as a glass surface. TransLab [30] also fails to detect the glass surface in the top row as the glass boundary is not ob-vious, and mis-recognizes the non-glass region in the bot-tom image as a glass surface. 113415
In this paper, we aim to address this challenging glass surface detection problem. Our observations are that hu-mans often rely on the identiﬁcation of reﬂections in order to be aware of the presence of glass, and the localization of the boundary in order to determine the extent of the glass surface. These two observations motivate us to explore two visual cues, i.e., glass reﬂections and boundaries, for glass surface detection. Based on these two observations, we pro-pose a new model for glass surface detection with two novel modules. We propose a Rich Context Aggregation Module (RCAM) for multi-scale boundary feature extraction, and a Reﬂection-based Reﬁnement Module (RRM) for detect-ing glass reﬂections to help determine glass regions. Note that unlike TransLab [30], which requires explicit boundary maps for guiding their network training, our RRM aims to exploit context contrasted features to ﬂexibly locate glass boundaries at different sizes and shapes in different context levels. Figure 1 demonstrates the superiority of the pro-posed model. Even though the glass surface boundary in the ﬁrst image is not obvious, our model can detect the glass region fairly accurate. It can also accurately detect the two glass doors but not the middle non-glass region.
In addition, we note that although a glass dataset (GDD) is proposed by Mei et al. [20], the images in it are collected from limited scenes and captured mainly based on close-up shots. This can signiﬁcantly limit the generalization per-formance of the trained model. To address this limitation, we propose a challenging glass surface dataset that contains close-up, normal and long shots, from diverse scenes with glass surfaces. Our dataset contains a total of 4,012 glass images with corresponding glass surface masks. It covers a diversity of indoor and outdoor scenes. We have conducted extensive experiments to evaluate our model and show that the proposed model outperforms state-of-the-art methods on both GDD and our proposed dataset.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel model that consists of a Rich
Context Aggregation Module (RCAM) for multi-scale boundary features extraction and a Reﬂection-based
Reﬁnement Module (RRM) to extract glass reﬂections for glass surface detection.
• We have constructed a challenging glass surface dataset, which consists of 4,012 real-world images with glass surface masks, from diverse scenes.
• Our extensive experiments demonstrate the superior-ity of the proposed model over state-of-the-art methods from relevant ﬁelds. 2.