Abstract
Faulty Negative
We present a self-supervised learning method to learn audio and video representations. Prior work uses the nat-ural correspondence between audio and video to deﬁne a standard cross-modal instance discrimination task, where a model is trained to match representations from the two modalities. However, the standard approach introduces two sources of training noise. First, audio-visual corre-spondences often produce faulty positives since the audio and video signals can be uninformative of each other. To limit the detrimental impact of faulty positives, we optimize a weighted contrastive learning loss, which down-weighs their contribution to the overall loss. Second, since self-supervised contrastive learning relies on random sampling of negative instances, instances that are semantically similar to the base instance can be used as faulty negatives. To alle-viate the impact of faulty negatives, we propose to optimize an instance discrimination loss with a soft target distribution that estimates relationships between instances. We validate our contributions through extensive experiments on action recognition tasks and show that they address the problems of audio-visual instance discrimination and improve transfer learning performance. 1.

Introduction
Self-supervised representation learning aims to learn feature representations that can transfer to downstream tasks without costly human annotations. Many recent self-supervised methods [11, 36, 51, 14, 78, 74] use a variant of the instance discrimination framework [81, 22], which matches features from multiple views/augmentations of the same instance, while distinguishing these features from those of other instances. This often relies on a contrastive loss [31], where different augmentations are considered ‘positives’ and other samples ‘negatives.’
Cross-modal instance discrimination (xID) extends in-stance discrimination to the realm of multiple modalities, where data modalities, such as video, audio, or text, act as the
*Contacting author.
Faulty 
Positive
⋯