Abstract 3D point cloud registration is a fundamental problem in computer vision and robotics. Recently, learning-based point cloud registration methods have made great progress.
However, these methods are sensitive to outliers, which lead to more incorrect correspondences.
In this paper, we propose a novel deep graph matching-based frame-work for point cloud registration. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst transform point clouds into graphs and extract deep fea-tures for each point. Then, we develop a module based on deep graph matching to calculate a soft correspon-dence matrix. By using graph matching, not only the lo-cal geometry of each point but also its structure and topol-ogy in a larger range are considered in establishing cor-respondences, so that more correct correspondences are found. We train the network with a loss directly deﬁned on the correspondences, and in the test stage the soft cor-respondences are transformed into hard one-to-one corre-spondences so that registration can be performed by sin-gular value decomposition. Furthermore, we introduce a transformer-based method to generate edges for graph con-struction, which further improves the quality of the corre-spondences. Extensive experiments on registering clean, noisy, partial-to-partial and unseen category point clouds show that the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance. The code will be made publicly available at https://github.com/fukexue/RGM. 1.

Introduction
Rigid point cloud registration is a task that ﬁnds a rigid transformation to align two point clouds, and it has long been a fundamental task in computer vision and robotics, with many important applications, such as autopilot [21, 19, 36], surgical navigation [44] and SLAM [13, 9]. There are two interlocked subproblems in point cloud registration:
ﬁnding the transformation to align the two point clouds and
∗Corresponding author
Figure 1. The idea of point cloud registration based on graph matching. Dashed lines represent correspondences. Point fea-tures and graph features are the features extracted directly through points and the features extracted based on graphs, respectively.
The two points xi and yj have similar point features because they have similar local geometries, but they have different graph fea-tures because the graph topologies around them are different, so they are not mismatched when graph-based matching is used.
ﬁnding the correspondences between the points [17]. Al-though when the solution to one subproblem is known, the other subproblem can be easily solved, it is difﬁcult to solve both subproblems together. Point cloud registration be-comes even harder when there are outliers, which are the points with no correspondences in the other point cloud.
Outliers may come from the imperfectness of the sensors used to collect the point clouds or situations in which the two point clouds to be registered are not fully overlapped.
Iterative closest point (ICP) [3, 31] is arguably the most widely used method for rigid point cloud registration, which starts from an initial transformation and alternately updates the correspondences and transformation. One major lim-itation of ICP is that it can only converge to a local op-timum near the initialization, and its convergence basin is fairly small, especially when there are noise and outliers. A series of global registration methods based on branch-and-bound (BnB) [42, 5, 6] have been proposed to alleviate the need for initialization by obtaining the global optimal solu-tion, but the time-consuming BnB limits their practical ap-plications. Another method for mitigating the need for ini-8893
tialization is by keypoint extraction and matching [28, 29].
Based on the correspondences established by matching key points, RANSAC-like methods can be explored for registra-tion [28, 29]. However, the speed and accuracy of this type of method are sensitive to outliers and repetitive geometry
[30]. Several recent methods integrate deep neural networks for establishing correspondences and a differentiable sin-gular value decomposition (SVD) algorithm for calculating the transformation to build an end-to-end trainable network for point cloud registration, such as DCP [38], RPM-Net
[43] and IDAM [18], and they do not need transformation initialization. These methods explore deep features to es-tablish correspondences but the discrimination ability of the features extracted from point clouds is poor, as shown in
Figure 1, which leads to a large proportion of incorrect cor-respondences and consequently devastates the registration accuracy.
In this paper, we propose a robust point cloud registra-tion framework that utilizes deep graph matching to better handle outliers, and we denote it as RGM. By constructing graphs from point clouds to be registered and capturing the high-order structure of the graphs, RGM can ﬁnd robust and accurate point-to-point correspondences to better solve the point cloud registration problem. To the best of our knowl-edge, this is the ﬁrst time that deep graph matching has been applied to point cloud registration. RGM contains an end-to-end deep neural network, the ﬁrst part of which is a fea-ture extractor that extracts deep local features for each point by using its neighboring points. Instead of matching these local point features directly, we construct a graph for each of the two point clouds and embed [37] both the graph nodes (local features for each point) and graph structure (second-order or high-order structure) into node feature space. Then, we introduce an module consisting of an afﬁnity layer, in-stance normalization and Sinkhorn to predict soft corre-spondences from the node features of the two graphs, and we denote it as AIS module. By using graph matching in the
AIS module, not only the local geometry of each node but also its structure and topology in a larger range are consid-ered in establishing correspondences so that more correct correspondences are found. In training, the binary cross-entropy loss between the predicted soft correspondences and the ground-truth correspondences are adopted, which directly promotes the network to learn better point-to-point correspondences. In testing, we use the linear assignment problem (LAP) solver [15] based on the Hungarian algo-rithm [16] to transform soft correspondences into one-to-one hard correspondences, and then SVD is employed to calculate the transformation from the hard correspondences.
Similar to existing methods such as RPM-Net and ICP, we iteratively optimize the registration results.
Our main contributions are as follows:
• We propose using deep graph matching to solve the point cloud registration problem for the ﬁrst time. In-stead of only using the features of each point, graph matching can leverage the features of other nodes and the structural information of graphs when establishing correspondences so that it can better address the prob-lem of outliers.
• We introduce the AIS module to establish reliable cor-respondences between nodes of two given graphs. The
AIS module calculates an afﬁnity matrix between any two nodes based on the embedded features, and by an-alyzing the afﬁnity matrix globally and utilizing the
Sinkhorn algorithm, it can effectively reduce the pro-portion of incorrect correspondences.
• We propose using a transformer to generate soft graph edges.
In registering partial-to-partial point clouds, better correspondences can be established for the over-lapping parts by utilizing the attention and co-attention mechanism in the transformer.
• Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on clean, noisy, partial-to-partial datasets and unseen cat-egories datasets. 2.