Abstract
A deraining network can be interpreted as a conditional generator that aims at removing rain streaks from image.
Most existing image deraining methods ignore model er-rors caused by uncertainty that reduces embedding qual-ity. Unlike existing image deraining methods that embed low-quality features into the model directly, we replace low-quality features by latent high-quality features. The spirit of closed-loop feedback in the automatic control ﬁeld is bor-rowed to obtain latent high-quality features. A new method for error detection and feature compensation is proposed to address model errors. Extensive experiments on bench-mark datasets as well as speciﬁc real datasets demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms recent state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at: https://github.com/LI-Hao-SJTU/DerainRLNet 1.

Introduction
Outdoor vision systems are used widely such as on intel-ligent vehicles and for surveillance. They sometimes suf-fer from rain pollution, which is undesirable in practice.
To handle this problem, study on image deraining has ap-peared, which aims at removing rain streaks from image.
Some methods exploit speciﬁc a priori knowledge to clean images. For example, [8] introduces the dark channel;
[7] maximizes the contrast among different target image re-gions. However, sparse rain streaks cannot be well removed by these methods. Some physical properties based derain-ing methods aim at separating the rain layer from the back-ground layer via discriminative sparse coding [1, 20, 32], dictionary learning [14], and Gaussian mixture models [18].
However, speciﬁc a priori knowledge based methods are susceptible to complex, diverse, and changeable scenarios.
In recent years, deep learning based image deraining methods are rising. A deraining network can be interpreted as a conditional generator, and high-quality output images
Research supported by SJTU Young Talent Funding (WF220426002).
* Corresponding author: Hao Li (Email: haoli@sjtu.edu.cn)
Rainy image
DID [33]
Ours
Rainy image
RESCAN [17]
Figure 1. Image deraining. DID [33] tends to under-derain while
RESCAN [17] tends to remove details of clean image.
Ours can be generated if conditional embedding features can characterize target image contents [24]. Most deep learning based deraining methods focus on designing novel network structures and guided features, such as residual based DDN
[6], density based DID [33], recurrent structure based RES-CAN [17], which can be regarded as strategies for embed-ding enhancement. Furthermore, [24] embeds mixed fea-ture layers into the model and decode it into a clean image.
Methods that do not consider uncertainty-induced model er-rors tend to loss details and incur halo artefacts in the gen-erated image (see Fig. 1).
To handle uncertainty-caused model errors, we propose a robust representation learning with feedback for image de-raining. Given an image with rain streaks, the objective is to output the residual map. Then the clean image can be obtained by subtracting the residual map from the rainy im-age as illustrated in Fig. 2. Since the embedding guides residual map generation, according to the image represen-tation theory in [16], we try to ﬁnd a functional relationship between basic embedding features and the optimal ones in the latent mapping space. The error detector and the fea-ture compensator are designed to address model errors, for approximating the optimal embedding features. The contri-butions of the paper are three-fold: 1) We analyzed the impact of uncertainty in the training process and the possibility of model error remapping via convolutional neural networks. 7742
2) Based on the idea of closed-loop control, the error detector and the feature compensator are designed for ad-dressing model error via feedback mechanism. 3) Unlike existing image deraining methods that embed low-quality features into the model directly, we replace low-quality features with latent high-quality features. This is a new perspective for improving the deraining performance. 2.