Abstract
In recent years, Face Image Quality Assessment (FIQA) has become an indispensable part of the face recognition system to guarantee the stability and reliability of recogni-tion performance in an unconstrained scenario. For this purpose, the FIQA method should consider both the in-trinsic property and the recognizability of the face image.
Most previous works aim to estimate the sample-wise em-bedding uncertainty or pair-wise similarity as the quality score, which only considers the partial information from the intra-class. However, these methods ignore the valuable in-formation from the inter-class, which is for estimating the recognizability of face image. In this work, we argue that a high-quality face image should be similar to its intra-class samples and dissimilar to its inter-class samples. Thus, we propose a novel unsupervised FIQA method that incorpo-rates Similarity Distribution Distance for Face Image Qual-ity Assessment (SDD-FIQA). Our method generates qual-ity pseudo-labels by calculating the Wasserstein Distance (WD) between the intra-class and inter-class similarity dis-tributions. With these quality pseudo-labels, we are capa-ble of training a regression network for quality prediction.
Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed SDD-FIQA surpasses the state-of-the-arts by an impressive margin. Meanwhile, our method shows good generalization across different recognition systems. 1.

Introduction
Face recognition is one of the well-researched areas of biometrics [8, 11, 4]. Under controlled conditions, the
∗indicates equal contribution of this work. 󰂒 indicates the correspond-ing author (e-mail: wangyg@gzhu.edu.cn). ⊎ Work done during an intern-ship at Youtu Lab, Tencent. This work was supported in part by the NSFC (Grant 61872099) and in part by the Science and Technology Program of Guangzhou (Grant 201904010478). The code and model are publicly available at https://github.com/Slinene/SDD-FIQA
Target Sample
Target Sample
Intra-class Sample
Intra-class Sample
Inter-class Sample
Inter-class Sample
Result
Results 74.77 74.77 74.77 70.34 70.34 74.77
Wasserstein Distance
Wasserstein Distance
Neg-Sim
Neg-Sim
Pos-Sim
Pos-Sim
Pseudo Label = 53.64
Pseudo Label = 53.64  57.89 57.89
Figure 1: Our method simultaneously considers similari-ties of the target sample (red point) with intra-class samples (green points), and with inter-class samples (yellow points).
The distribution distance between Pos-Sim and Neg-Sim is calculated as the quality pseudo-label, which is more ami-cable to recognition performance. The visualized results are shown on the right. recognition system can usually achieve satisfactory perfor-mance. However, in some real-world applications, recog-nition systems need to work under unconstrained environ-ments (e.g. surveillance camera and outdoor scenes), lead-ing to signiﬁcant degradation of recognition accuracy and unstable recognition performance. Many researchers make progress in improving recognition accuracy under varying conditions [4, 12], but sometimes the performance is still af-fected by the unpredictable environmental factors including pose, illumination, occlusion, and so on. To keep the perfor-mance of face recognition system stable and reliable, Face
Image Quality Assessment (FIQA) has been developed to support the recognition system to pick out high-quality im-ages or drop low-quality ones for stable recognition perfor-mance [7, 1].
Existing FIQA methods can be roughly categorized into two types: analytics-based [7, 22, 27] and learning-based
[1, 10, 23, 25, 29]. Analytics-based FIQA deﬁnes quality metrics by Human Visual System (HVS) and evaluates face 7670
风
云
编
辑
器
Dataset
Generation of Quality Pseudo-labels
Class 1
Class 2
…
Recognition Model 74.06 66.79 82.47 43.16
…
…
…
Training Quality Regression Network
Prediction of Quality Scores 
…
R e g r e s s o n i
Huber Loss
Quality Score
… 54.88 35.47 73.22 79.98
Class M
Quality Model
Labeling
Training
Testing
Figure 2: The framework of SDD-FIQA. Step 1: The training data traverses the face recognition model, then its Pos-Sim and Neg-Sim are collected. Step 2: The Wasserstein distance between the Pos-Sim and Neg-Sim is calculated as the quality pseudo-label. Step 3: The quality regression network is trained under the constrain of Huber loss for FIQA. image quality with handcrafted features, such as asymme-tries of facial area [7], illumination intensity [22], and ver-tical edge density [27]. However, these approaches have to manually extract features for different quality degradations, and it is unrealistic to annotate all possible degradations.
Thus, more researchers take effort into the learning-based approach, which aims to generate quality scores directly from the recognition model without human effort. The most critical part of these approaches is to establish the mapping function between image quality and recognition model. Ag-garwal et al. [1] proposed a multi-dimensional scaling ap-proach to map space characterization features to genuine quality scores. Hernandez-Ortega et al. [10] calculate the
Euclidean distance of intra-class recognition embeddings as the quality score. Shi et al. [23] and Terhorst et al. [25] pro-posed to predict the variations of recognition embeddings as face image quality. Very recently, Xie et al. [29] pro-posed PCNet to evaluate face image quality via dynamically mining positive mated-pairs. Despite these learning-based methods make progress in FIQA, the performances are still unsatisfactory. Since they only consider the partial intra-class similarity or feature uncertainty from the recognition model and ignore the important information of inter-class similarity, which is the key factor for the recognizability of face image.
In this paper, we propose a novel learning-based method called SDD-FIQA. Regarding FIQA as a recognizability es-timation problem, we ﬁrst reveal the intrinsic relationship between the recognition performance and face image qual-ity. Speciﬁcally, for the target sample, we employ a recog-nition model to collect its intra-class similarity distribution (Pos-Sim) and inter-class similarity distribution (Neg-Sim).
Then the Wasserstein Distance (WD) between these two distributions is calculated as the quality pseudo-label. Fi-nally, a quality regression network is trained under the con-straint of Huber loss. Our method can accurately predict the face image quality score in a label-free manner. The main idea of SDD-FIQA is shown in Fig. 1, and the major contributions of this paper are as follows.
• We are the ﬁrst to consider both the intra-class and inter-class recognition similarity distributions for the
FIQA problem.
• We propose a new framework of estimating face image quality, which is label-free and closely linked with the recognition performance.
• We are the ﬁrst to evaluate the FIQA method by em-ploying different recognition models for generaliza-tion evaluation, which is more consistent with the real-world applications.
• The proposed SDD-FIQA outperforms the state-of-the-arts by a large margin in terms of accuracy and generalization on benchmark datasets. 2.