Abstract
In this paper, we study the semi-supervised semantic seg-mentation problem via exploring both labeled data and ex-tra unlabeled data. We propose a novel consistency regular-ization approach, called cross pseudo supervision (CPS).
Our approach imposes the consistency on two segmenta-tion networks perturbed with different initialization for the same input image. The pseudo one-hot label map, output from one perturbed segmentation network, is used to su-pervise the other segmentation network with the standard cross-entropy loss, and vice versa. The CPS consistency has two roles: encourage high similarity between the predic-tions of two perturbed networks for the same input image, and expand training data by using the unlabeled data with pseudo labels. Experiment results show that our approach achieves the state-of-the-art semi-supervised segmentation performance on Cityscapes and PASCAL VOC 2012. 1.

Introduction
Image semantic segmentation is a fundamental recogni-tion task in computer vision. The semantic segmentation training data requires pixel-level manual labeling, which is much more expensive compared to the other vision tasks, such as image classiﬁcation and object detection. This makes semi-supervised segmentation an important problem to learn segmentation models by using the labeled data as well as the additional unlabeled data.
Consistency regularization is widely studied in semi-supervised semantic segmentation. It enforces the consis-tency of the predictions with various perturbations, e.g., input perturbation by augmenting input images [11, 19], feature perturbation [27], and network perturbation [18].
Self-training is also studied for semi-supervised segmenta-tion [6, 43, 42, 9, 13, 25]. It incorporates pseudo segmen-tation maps on the unlabeled images obtained from the seg-mentation model trained on the labeled images to expand the training data, and retrains the segmentation model.
We present a novel and simple consistency regularization
*This work was done when Xiaokang Chen was an intern at Microsoft
Research, Beijing, P.R. China approach with network perturbation, called cross pseudo su-pervision. The proposed approach feeds the labeled and un-labeled images into two segmentation networks that share the same structure and are initialized differently. The out-puts of the two networks on the labeled data are supervised separately by the corresponding ground-truth segmentation map. Our main point lies in the cross pseudo supervision that enforces the consistency between the two segmentation networks. Each segmentation network for an input image estimates a segmentation result, called pseudo segmentation map. The pseudo segmentation map is used as an additional signal to supervise the other segmentation network.
The beneﬁts from the cross pseudo supervision scheme lie in two-fold. On the one hand, like previous consistency regularization, the proposed approach encourages that the predictions across differently initialized networks for the same input image are consistent and that the prediction de-cision boundary lies in low-density regions. On the other hand, during the later optimization stage the pseudo seg-mentation becomes stable and more accurate than the result from normal supervised training only on the labeled data.
The pseudo labeled data behaves like expanding the train-ing data, thus improving the segmentation network training quality.
Experimental results with various settings on two bench-marks, Cityscapes and PASCAL VOC 2012, show that the proposed cross pseudo supervision approach is superior to existing consistency schemes for semi-supervised segmen-tation. Our approach achieves the state-of-the-art semi-supervised segmentation performance on both benchmarks. 2.