Abstract
Pedestrian trajectory prediction is a key technology in autopilot, which remains to be very challenging due to com-plex interactions between pedestrians. However, previous works based on dense undirected interaction suffer from modeling superﬂuous interactions and neglect of trajectory motion tendency, and thus inevitably result in a considerable deviance from the reality. To cope with these issues, we present a Sparse Graph Convolution Network (SGCN) for pedestrian trajectory prediction. Speciﬁcally, the SGCN ex-plicitly models the sparse directed interaction with a sparse directed spatial graph to capture adaptive interaction pedes-trians. Meanwhile, we use a sparse directed temporal graph to model the motion tendency, thus to facilitate the prediction based on the observed direction. Finally, parameters of a bi-Gaussian distribution for trajectory prediction are esti-mated by fusing the above two sparse graphs. We evaluate our proposed method on the ETH and UCY datasets, and the experimental results show our method outperforms compara-tive state-of-the-art methods by 9% in Average Displacement
Error (ADE) and 13% in Final Displacement Error (FDE).
Notably, visualizations indicate that our method can capture adaptive interactions between pedestrians and their effective motion tendencies. 1.

Introduction
Given the observed trajectories of pedestrians, pedestrian trajectory prediction aims to predict a sequence of future location coordinates of pedestrians, which plays a critical role in various applications like autonomous driving [3, 29], video surveillance [28, 45] and visual recognition [9, 27, 16].
Despite the recent advances in the literature, pedes-trian trajectory prediction remains to be a very challeng-ing task due to the complex interactions between pedes-trians. For example, the motion of a pedestrian is very easy to be disturbed by other pedestrians [11], close friends
∗Corresponding author. (A.1) Dense Undirected 
Interaction (A.2) Sparse Undirected 
Interaction (A.3) Sparse Directed 
Interaction
Real Trajectory 
Scenario (B.1) Prediction 
Discrepancy (B.2) Alleviating Discrepancy  with Motion Tendency (B.3) Versatile Motion 
Tendencies (A+B) Combination
Observed Trajectory 
Pedestrian
Predicted Trajectory
Ground Truth
Motion Tendency
Figure 1. Sparse Directed Interaction & Motion Tendency. Dif-(A.1) Dense ferent pedestrians are marked in different colors. undirected interaction, where any pedestrian interacts with all other pedestrians. (A.2) Sparse undirected interaction with superﬂuous interactions being removed. (A.3) Sparse directed interaction with adaptive interaction pedestrians. (B.1) The predicted trajectory severely deviates from the ground-truth as the pedestrians try to avoid collision against each other. (B.2) Trajectory points enclosed by the blue dotted circle indicate a motion tendency which may be leveraged for trajectory prediction. (B.3) Variation of motion tendencies with different sets of trajectory points. or colleagues are likely to walk in groups [32], and differ-ent pedestrians usually conduct similar social actions [38].
To model the interactions between pedestrians, extensive works [31, 2, 11, 23, 19, 32, 46] have been done in the past few years, in which the weighting-by-distance
[31, 2, 11, 32] and the attention-based meth-methods ods [23, 19, 46, 8, 17, 18] have achieved the state-of-the-art results in pedestrian trajectory prediction.
Most of the weighting-by-distance and attention-based methods take a dense interaction model to represent the com-plex interactions between pedestrians, in which they assume that a pedestrian interacts with all the rest pedestrians. Be-sides, the weighting-by-distance methods apply the relative distance to model the undirected interaction, in which the in-teraction between two pedestrians are identical to each other.
However, we argue that both the dense interaction and undi-rected interaction will introduce the superﬂuous interactions between pedestrians. As shown in Figure 1: (1) two pairs of 8994
pedestrians head towards from the opposite direction, while only the trajectory of red pedestrian detours to avoid the col-lision with green pedestrian; and (2) the trajectories of blue and yellow pedestrians not inﬂuence each other. It is obvious that the dense or sparse undirected interaction based methods will fail to deal with the interactions in this case. For exam-ple, the dense undirected interaction, as represented by A.1, will generate superﬂuous interactions between yellow and blue pedestrians, due to the trajectories of yellow and blue pedestrians do not inﬂuence each other. Besides, the sparse undirected interaction, as denoted in A.2, generates the su-perﬂuous interactions between the green and red pedestrians, because the red pedestrian detours to avoid collision with the green pedestrian, while the green pedestrian walks straight forward. To solve the above problems, it’s better to design a Sparse Directed Interaction, as shown in A.3, which can interact with the adaptive pedestrians in the prediction of pedestrian trajectory.
What’s worse, previous works focus on collision avoid-ance, which leads to the predicted trajectories tend to gener-ate detour trajectories to avoid the collision for green and red pedestrians, as indicated in B.1, while the green pedestrian deviates from the ground truth. In this case, we propose motion tendency, which is represented by a short-term tra-jectory enclosed by the blue dotted circle as shown in B.2, the trajectory direction of the green pedestrian is straight forward, and that of the red pedestrian deﬂects to avoid the collision with the green pedestrian. Based on the assumption that the direction of a trajectory will not change too abruptly, the motion tendency is beneﬁcial to the prediction for green pedestrian. It should be noted that the motion tendency is versatile, as shown in B.3, in which the last one performs better than others, because it can jointly capture the “straight forward” and “temporary deviation” tendencies. Once the effective set of intermediate points can be found, the motion tendency will facilitate pedestrian trajectory prediction.
In this paper, we present a novel Sparse Graph Convolu-tion Network (SGCN) which combines the Sparse Directed
Interaction and Motion Tendency for pedestrian trajectory prediction. As shown in Figure 1 (A+B), the Sparse Directed
Interaction discover the set of pedestrians that effectively inﬂuence the trajectory of a particular pedestrian, and the
Motion Tendencies improve the future trajectory of inter-acted pedestrians. In particular, as shown in Figure 2, the
Sparse Directed Spatial graph and Sparse Directed Tempo-ral graph are jointly learned to model the Sparse Directed
Interaction and the Motion Tendency of trajectory. Speciﬁ-cally, the Sparse Graph Learning, as illustrated in Figure 3, leverages self-attention [40] mechanism to learn the asym-metric dense and directed interaction scores between trajec-tory points. Then, these interaction scores are fused and fed into asymmetric convolutional networks to obtain high-level interaction features. Finally, a sparse directed spatial and a sparse directed temporal adjacency matrix can be obtained after pruning the superﬂuous interactions using a constant threshold and a normalization step of our “Zero-Softmax” function. The ﬁnal asymmetric normalized sparse directed adjacency matrices can represent the sparse directed graph.
Once the above two graphs are obtained, we further learn the trajectory representation by a cascade of Graph Convo-lution Networks [22], and employ the Time Convolution
Network [4] to estimate the parameters of the bi-Gaussian distribution, which are used to generate the predicted trajec-tories.
Extensive experimetal results on the ETH [34] and
UCY [24] datasets show that our method outperforms all the comparison state-of-the-art works.
To our best knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work that explicitly models the Sparse Directed Interaction and Motion Tendency.
In summary, our contributions are three-fold: (1) we propose to model the Sparse Directed Interaction and Motion Ten-dency to improve the predicted trajectories; (2) we design an adaptive method to model the Sparse Directed Interaction and Motion Tendency; and (3) we propose a sparse graph convolution network to learn the trajectory representations, where the advantage of explicit sparsity is demonstrated by the experiments. 2.