Abstract
The sky exhibits a unique spatial polarization pattern by scattering the unpolarized sun light. Just like insects use this unique angular pattern to navigate, we use it to map pixels to directions on the sky. That is, we show that the unique polarization pattern encoded in the polarimetric ap-pearance of an object captured under the sky can be de-coded to reveal the surface normal at each pixel. We de-rive a polarimetric reﬂection model of a diffuse plus mir-ror surface lit by the sun and a clear sky. This model is used to recover the per-pixel surface normal of an object from a single polarimetric image or from multiple polari-metric images captured under the sky at different times of the day. We experimentally evaluate the accuracy of our shape-from-sky method on a number of real objects of dif-ferent surface compositions. The results clearly show that this passive approach to ﬁne-geometry recovery that fully leverages the unique illumination made by nature is a viable option for 3D sensing. With the advent of quad-Bayer po-larization chips, we believe the implications of our method span a wide range of domains. 1.

Introduction
Methods for 3D reconstruction have been of central in-terest in computer vision since its inception. A robust solu-tion to it underlies a wide range of applications within vi-sion and in surrounding areas including robotics, extended reality (XR), and medicine. The challenge of this 2D to 3D inverse problem lies in the combination surface reﬂectance and incident illumination that generates the complex ap-pearance of a given geometry.
In this work, we are interested in recovering the ﬁne ge-ometry represented by per-pixel surface normals. Surface normal recovery can be interpreted as decoding the incident illumination from its reﬂectance-modulated pixel intensity.
If we know the spatial pattern of the illumination (e.g., three point sources) and the reﬂectance dictated by the object ma-terial properties (e.g., Lambertian), we can “demodulate” the pixel intensity to obtain the surface normal.
Consider two simple models of the interaction of light at a surface. On one hand, the appearance of a Lamber-tian surface lit by a point source can be perfectly modeled with simple linear equations from which we can recover per-pixel surface normals. On the other hand, the appear-ance of an ideal mirror surface captured under a rainbow-like angularly unique illumination directly tells us per-pixel surface normals by simple lookup.
The reality, however, lives somewhere in between a set of simple point source illumination and an angularly unique one, and we generally do not know the exact reﬂectance. As a result, we are forced to solve an ill-posed problem blindly.
This has led to numerous methods in the space such as pho-∗ Equal contribution. 14832
tometric stereo of objects with reﬂectance of varying com-plexity and inverse rendering with strong statistical priors.
Is there any real-world situation in which we can assume a known illumination pattern that is sufﬁciently unique across its spatial or angular span? If so, we could reduce this disentanglement problem to decoding the unknown modu-lation by the reﬂection while simultaneously recovering the surface normal. Is there such a unique imaging setup that is readily accessible, and how can we fully leverage it to recover ﬁne geometry, namely per-pixel surface normals of arbitrary material objects?
In this paper, we show that indeed there exists a very con-venient lighting setup right above us: the sky. The sky, on a clear day, has an angular polarization distribution uniquely deﬁned by the latitude and longitude centered around the sun. The Rayleigh sky model conveniently predicts both the angle of polarization (AOP) and the degree of polariza-tion (DOP) across the sky as illustrated in Figure 2 [28].
We show that this everyday, but special angular polariza-tion pattern readily gives us sufﬁcient incident cues that are modulated by the unknown reﬂectance and unknown sur-face normals so that we can robustly decode it to recover spatially varying reﬂectance and per-pixel surface normals.
We conduct a number of experiments using real im-ages taken outdoors with a linear polarizer at the camera or with a quad-Bayer polarization camera. The results clearly demonstrate that our method can recover accurate ﬁne ge-ometry of objects with complex reﬂectance from a single or a few polarimetric images taken completely passively.
The implication of this work is far-reaching. With the ad-vent of polarization cameras using quad-sensor chips, the proposed work gives the ability to perform 3D reconstruc-tion under natural lighting without point matching. Further-more, while specular surfaces are typically challenging to reconstruct with geometric methods, these surfaces are par-ticularly well-suited for shape-from-sky. 2.