Abstract
We propose a novel Siamese Natural Language
Tracker (SNLT), which brings the advancements in vi-sual tracking to the tracking by natural language (NL) descriptions task. The proposed SNLT is applicable to a wide range of Siamese trackers, providing a new class of baselines for the tracking by NL task and promis-ing future improvements from the advancements of
Siamese trackers. The carefully designed architecture of the Siamese Natural Language Region Proposal Net-work (SNL-RPN), together with the Dynamic Aggrega-tion of vision and language modalities, is introduced to perform the tracking by NL task. Empirical results over tracking benchmarks with NL annotations show that the proposed SNLT improves Siamese trackers by 3 to 7 percentage points with a slight tradeoﬀ of speed. The proposed SNLT outperforms all NL trackers to-date and is competitive among state-of-the-art real-time trackers on LaSOT benchmarks while running at 50 frames per second on a single GPU. Code for this work is available at https: // github. com/ fredfung007/ snlt . 1.

Introduction
Visual and language recognition skills evolve jointly in children from a young age. For example, it was ob-served [33] that children at the age of twenty months whose vocabulary size lags behind their peers have dif-ﬁculty recognizing objects with sparse features (i.e., stylized versions of real-world objects). Conversely, a child’s ability to engage in the play activity called object substitution tends to be a predictor of healthy language development [34].
By contrast, in computer vision, particularly in ob-ject tracking, appearance-based methods [24, 25] and tracking via natural-language (NL) descriptions [14, 26] evolve independently, without beneﬁting each other.
)
S
P
F ( d n o c e
S r e p s e m a r
F 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0
SiamFC(2017) with SNLT
SiamRPN(2018)
SiamRPN++(2019) with SNLT
DiMP(2019) with SNLT
PrDiMP(2020)
FENG(2020)
LI(2017)
ATOM(2019)
Siamese Trackers
Our SNLT Variants
NL Trackers
Other Visual Trackers 0.2
Precision on LaSOT test set 0.6 0.4 0.8
Figure 1: The proposed Siamese Natural Language
Tracker (SNLT) improves Siamese trackers by lever-aging predictions from two modalities: vision and lan-guage. Our SNLT implementation runs at 50 frames per second on an NVIDIA 2080 Ti GPU, and out-performs best published natural language trackers, i.e.
Feng [14] and Li [26], on the LaSOT [13] test set. the vision and language modalities in such a way that improvements in appearance-based tracking yield improvements in language-based tracking. Our for-mulation applies to Siamese trackers, a broad family of trackers that includes SiamFC [1], SiamRPN [25],
SiamRPN++ [24], etc. Siamese trackers have proven to be successful in many tracking scenarios and have achieved state-of-the-art performance. We show that by bringing the advancements of these Siamese trackers to the tracking by NL task, we can build NL trackers that outperform all prior NL trackers and promise to see improvements over time with the advancements of
Siamese trackers.
In this paper, we derive a formulation that links
Hence, we present the ﬁrst practical and general so-5851
lution to the challenge of tracking with NL descriptions in real-time. Firstly, we propose a Siamese Natural
Language Region Proposal Network (SNL-RPN) that transforms an NL description into a convolutional ker-nel and shares feature extraction layers with Siamese trackers; the combined network can be trained end-to-end. Secondly, we propose a novel formulation to dy-namically aggregate the predictions of our SNL-RPN from two modalities: vision and language, which turns the SNL-RPN from a visual-language detector into a real-time Siamese Natural Language Tracker (SNLT).
The overview of a realization of the proposed SNLT is shown in Fig. 2.
We plot the frames per second (FPS) v.s. the preci-sion on LaSOT [13] for recent Siamese trackers and our
SNLT in Fig. 11. Our proposed SNLT consistently im-proves the performance of SiamFC [1], SiamRPN [25], and SiamRPN++ [24] with a slight trade-oﬀ of speed.
It also outperforms all NL trackers to date. This demonstrates that the SNLT brings the advancement of visual tracking models to the tracking by NL task and provides a wide range of state-of-the-art NL track-ers.
Contributions of this paper are threefold: 1. A novel and universal Siamese Natural Language
Region Proposal Network (SNL-RPN) is proposed for all Siamese trackers, providing a wide class of strong tracking by NL descriptions baselines. 2. A Dynamic Aggregation of predictions from vision and language modalities, is proposed to transform our SNL-RPN into a real-time Siamese Natural
Language Tracker (SNLT). Prior to this work, we are only aware of two NL trackers [14, 26]. 3. Empirical results over tracking benchmarks with
NL annotations show that the proposed SNLT improves Siamese trackers by 3 to 7 percentage points. The SNLT outperforms all NL trackers and is competitive with state-of-the-art real-time trackers on LaSOT benchmarks while running at over 50 frames per second. 2.