Abstract
Camouﬂage is a key defence mechanism across species that is critical to survival. Common strategies for camou-ﬂage include background matching, imitating the color and pattern of the environment, and disruptive coloration, dis-guising body outlines [37]. Camouﬂaged object detection (COD) aims to segment camouﬂaged objects hiding in their surroundings. Existing COD models are built upon binary ground truth to segment the camouﬂaged objects without illustrating the level of camouﬂage. In this paper, we re-visit this task and argue that explicitly modeling the con-spicuousness of camouﬂaged objects against their particu-lar backgrounds can not only lead to a better understand-ing about camouﬂage and evolution of animals, but also provide guidance to design more sophisticated camouﬂage techniques. Furthermore, we observe that it is some speciﬁc parts of the camouﬂaged objects that make them detectable by predators. With the above understanding about camou-ﬂaged objects, we present the ﬁrst ranking based COD net-work (Rank-Net) to simultaneously localize, segment and rank camouﬂaged objects. The localization model is pro-posed to ﬁnd the discriminative regions that make the cam-ouﬂaged object obvious. The segmentation model segments the full scope of the camouﬂaged objects. Further, the rank-ing model infers the detectability of different camouﬂaged objects. Moreover, we contribute a large COD testing set to evaluate the generalization ability of COD models. Exper-imental results show that our model achieves new state-of-the-art, leading to a more interpretable COD network1. 1.

Introduction
Camouﬂage is one of the most important anti-predator defences that prevents the prey from being recognized by predators [43]. Two main strategies have been widely used among prey to become camouﬂaged, namely background matching and disruptive coloration [37]. The prey that rely 1Our code and data is publicly available at: https://github. com / JingZhang617 / COD - Rank - Localize - and - Segment.
More detail about the training dataset can be found in http://dpfan. net/camouflage. 11591
on the former approach usually share similar color or pat-tern with their habitats, while for complex habitats, the background matching approach may increase their visibil-ity. Disruptive coloration works better in complex envi-ronments, where prey evolve to have relative high contrast markings near the body edges.
Both background matching and disruptive coloration aim to hide prey in the environment, or greatly reduce their saliency, which is closely related to the perception and cog-nition of perceivers. By delving into the process of cam-ouﬂaged object detection, the mechanisms of the human visual system can be ﬁnely explored. Further, an effec-tive camouﬂaged object detection model has potential to be applied in the ﬁeld of agriculture for insect control, or in medical image segmentation to detect an infection or tu-mor area [11, 12]. Further, it can improve performance for general object detection, for example where objects appear against similar backgrounds [10].
Existing camouﬂaged object detection models [10, 22, 61, 33, 25] are designed based on binary ground truth cam-ouﬂaged object datasets [22, 10, 44] as shown in Fig. 1, which can only reveal the existence of the camouﬂaged ob-jects without illustrating the level of camouﬂage. We argue that the estimation of the conspicuousness of camouﬂaged object against its surrounding can lead to a better under-standing about evolution of animals. Further, understanding the level of camouﬂage can help to design more sophisti-cated camouﬂage techniques [37], thus the prey can avoid being detected by predators. To model the detectability of camouﬂaged objects, we introduce the ﬁrst camouﬂage ranking model to infer the level of camouﬂage. Different from existing binary ground truth based models [10, 22, 62], we can produce the instance-level ranking-based camou-ﬂaged object prediction, indicating the global difﬁculty for human to observe the camouﬂaged objects.
Moreover, since most camouﬂaged objects lack obvious contrast with the background in terms of low-level features
[46], the detection of camouﬂaged objects may resort to features relevant to some “discriminative patterns”, such as face, eyes or antenna. We argue that it is those “discrim-inative patterns” that make the prey apparent to predators.
For background matching, these patterns have different col-ors to the surroundings, and for disruption coloration, they are low contrast body outlines in the complex habitats. To better understand the camouﬂage attribute of prey, we also propose to reveal the most detectable region of the camou-ﬂaged objects, namely the camouﬂaged object discrimina-tive region localization.
As there exists no ranking based camouﬂaged object de-tection dataset, we relabel an existing camouﬂaged object dataset [10, 22] with an eye tracker to record the detection delay2 of each camouﬂaged instance. We assume that the longer it takes for the observer to notice the camouﬂaged object, the higher level of this camouﬂaged instance. Tak-ing a ﬁxation based camouﬂaged object detection dataset, we obtain the ranking dataset based on the detection delay, as shown in Fig. 1. At the same time, the ﬁxation dataset can be used to estimate the discriminative regions of the camouﬂaged objects.
As far as we know, there only exists one large camou-ﬂaged object testing dataset, the COD10K [10], while the sizes of other testing datasets [22, 44] are less than 300. We then contribute another camouﬂaged object testing dataset, namely NC4K, which includes 4,121 images downloaded from the Internet. The new testing dataset can be used to evaluate the generalization ability of existing models.
Our main contributions can be summarized as: 1) We introduce camouﬂaged object ranking (COR) and camou-ﬂaged object localization (COL) as two new tasks to esti-mate the difﬁculty of camouﬂaged objects and identify the regions that make the camouﬂaged object obvious. 2) We provide corresponding training and testing datasets for the above two tasks. We also contribute the largest camouﬂaged object detection testing dataset. 3) We propose a triplet tasks learning model to simultaneously localize, segment and rank the camouﬂaged objects. 2.