Abstract
Three-dimensional scanning by means of structured light illumination is an active imaging technique involving pro-jecting and capturing a series of striped patterns and then using the observed warping of stripes to reconstruct the tar-get object’s surface through triangulating each pixel in the camera to a unique projector coordinate corresponding to a particular feature in the projected patterns. The unde-sirable phenomenon of multi-path occurs when a camera pixel simultaneously sees features from multiple projector coordinates. Bimodal multi-path is a particularly common situation found along step edges, where the camera pixel sees both a foreground and background surface. Gener-alized from bimodal multi-path, this paper examines the phenomenon of sparse or N -modal multi-path as a more general case, where the camera pixel sees no fewer than two reﬂective surfaces, resulting in decoding errors. Using fringe projection proﬁlometry, our proposed solution is to treat each camera pixel as an underdetermined linear sys-tem of equations and to ﬁnd the sparsest (least number of paths) solution by taking an application-speciﬁc Bayesian learning approach. We validate this algorithm with both simulations and a number of challenging real-world sce-narios, demonstrating that it outperforms state-of-the-art techniques. 1.

Introduction
In a digital camera, each pixel on the focal plane array records the average light measured across the pixel’s ﬁeld of view, and, in some cases, the pixel simultaneously records light from multiple paths, such as when a pixel sees the edge of the foreground object along with the non-occluded back-ground object. In this situation, the collected intensity/color will be a weighted sum of the foreground and background intensity/color, depending on how much of the foreground object takes up the pixel’s ﬁeld of view (Fig. 1). Sep-arating out the foreground and background contributions plays a fundamental role in a range of classic imaging tasks, such as image matting, where the alpha channel represents the weighting of the foreground and background compo-Sensor array
Lens
FoV
Figure 1. Illustrations of the causes of sparse multi-path and its representations in both 2D and 3D imaging. From left to right are the FoV of a pixel on the sensor array during the imaging procedure, a classic image matting task [30], and an ideal step edge compared with a reconstructed step edge under the effect of multi-path in the structured light or time-of-ﬂight imaging tech-niques [55]. camera camera camera target
P target
A
B target
A
B projector projector projector sparse  multipath sparse  multipath sparse  multipath
Figure 2. Illustration of sparse multi-path scenarios in (left) a curved reﬂective surface, (middle) a step edge, and (right) a semi-transparent surface in front of an opaque target with foreground pixel A and background pixel B. nents [47, 31]. In 3D imaging, the collecting of foreground and background light paths along a step edge can result in either a predictable smoothing of the step edge in the 3D re-construction or a catastrophic, unpredictable displacement of edge points [36, 54]. Fig. 2 illustrates three kinds of chal-lenging sparse multi-path scenarios, including a curved re-ﬂective surface, a step edge, and a semi-transparent surface in front of an opaque target. Regardless of the outcome, the multi-path problem is unavoidable in any scanning situ-ation, including structured light [23, 53] and time-of-ﬂight (ToF) [36, 34, 16], but it is an especially prevalent problem in structured light as very little research has been performed on the topic, and it has been largely ignored by the com-puter vision and computational imaging community until recently.
With the rapid development of deep learning in com-13344
puter vision, there is now a diverse range of neural network topologies [15, 42, 41, 57] that can process 3D data. This has likewise driven a demand for large model databases that include a diverse range of labeled objects, such as body scans SMPL-X [40], face scans Florence [1], object scans
PartNet [35], Redwood [7], indoor scene scans ScanNet [9], and outdoor road and vehicle scans KITTI [17]. As more and more work is done building AI models that can rec-ognize and reconstruct these existing objects, there will be an increasing demand for 3D scanners to acquire similarly diverse objects, perhaps containing specularities and other hard-to-scan features.
In order to address the need for a large volume of these objects, scanners will be required to handle these hard-to-scan features in a fully automated way.
A common active scanning technique for building high resolution, 3D object databases is structured light imaging (SLI), which involves projecting and capturing a series of striped or structured patterns and reading the patterns as they reﬂect off a target object’s surface [3, 19, 32, 21, 23, 50, 39, 44]. Because structured light scanners, including single pattern techniques [49, 18, 56] and multiple pattern techniques [19, 32, 5, 27], need to actively project patterns onto the target surface, they often suffer from multi-path issues in which a camera pixel sees light from multiple pro-jector positions, making accurate scanning impossible. It is a common and unavoidably important issue in many scan-ning situations where a target surface includes a step edge or a specular surface. Multi-path results, at best, in easily identiﬁable outliers like spikes along edges, which can be removed by ﬁltering or, at worst, in imperceptible changes to the surface like a blurring of edges. These small errors can be catastrophic in certain applications, such as digital dentistry where digital scans are replacing plastic molds for the manufacturing of replacement crowns.
With regard to multi-path interference and its cancella-tion, many papers have been devoted to ToF sensing using unique hardware that needs to be customized or modiﬁed.
Structured light scanners, on the other hand, can be con-structed from commodity components [53] and are, there-fore, widely studied; however, very few solutions exist for the multi-path problem, and relevant theories to address multi-path have not been ﬁrmly established. In this paper, we present an inexpensive and practical approach to address this N -modal multi-path issue by treating each pixel as an underdetermined linear system of equations and ﬁnding the sparsest (least number of paths) solution. We do so with-out any hardware modiﬁcations [39] or additional require-ments for novel/customized patterns [8, 22]. As a result, it is easy for our algorithms to be integrated into existing pop-ular and broadly used phase shifting structured light scan-ners. As part of this process, we combine a powerful sparse
Bayesian learning (SBL) framework with novel application-speciﬁc constraints. In aggregate, these contributions lead to state-of-the-art results in addressing multi-path problems regarding fringe projection proﬁlometry. 2.