Abstract
The remarkable success in face forgery techniques has received considerable attention in computer vision due to security concerns. We observe that up-sampling is a nec-essary step of most face forgery techniques, and cumula-tive up-sampling will result in obvious changes in the fre-quency domain, especially in the phase spectrum. Accord-ing to the property of natural images, the phase spectrum preserves abundant frequency components that provide ex-tra information and complement the loss of the amplitude spectrum. To this end, we present a novel Spatial-Phase
Shallow Learning (SPSL) method, which combines spa-tial image and phase spectrum to capture the up-sampling artifacts of face forgery to improve the transferability, for face forgery detection. And we also theoretically analyze the validity of utilizing the phase spectrum. Moreover, we notice that local texture information is more crucial than high-level semantic information for the face forgery detec-tion task. So we reduce the receptive ﬁelds by shallowing the network to suppress high-level features and focus on the local region. Extensive experiments show that SPSL can achieve the state-of-the-art performance on cross-datasets evaluation as well as multi-class classiﬁcation and obtain comparable results on single dataset evaluation. 1.

Introduction
Beneﬁting from the tremendous success of generative techniques, such as Variational Autoencoders (VAE) [35] and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [16], face
∗ Work done during the internship of Honggu Liu at Alibaba Group.
† Corresponding Author.
Figure 1: The variation analysis in the frequency do-main. The curve shows the average value of pixel differ-ence (mean and variance) of the phase spectrum between 1000 origin and up-sampling samples increase dramatically with the increase of the number of up-sampling. forgery has become an emerging hot research topic in very recent years. The face forgery techniques are able to syn-thesize realistic faces that are indistinguishable for human eyes. However, these forgery techniques are likely to be abused for malicious purposes, causing serious security and ethical issues (e.g. celebrity pornography and political per-secution). Therefore, it is of paramount importance to de-velop more general and practical methods for face forgery detection.
To alleviate the risks brought by malicious usage of face forgery, various methods [51, 26, 1, 49, 2, 39, 38, 13, 23, 36, 29, 8, 24] have been proposed. Most of these meth-ods detect face forgery in a supervised fashion with prior knowledge of face manipulation methods [1, 6, 24]. Un-der this setting, these approaches achieve excellent perfor-mance on some public datasets [49, 21, 38, 27, 46]. How-772
pivotal thought is that the phase spectrum is more hyper-sensitive to up-sampling than the amplitude spectrum. As shown in Figure 1, with more times of up-sampling oper-ations are performed, the average pixel differences of the phase spectrum get much greater than that of the amplitude spectrum. A visualization comparison can also be found in
Figure 2.
Moreover, [5] used the patch-based classiﬁcation to gen-eralize the image forensics. Thus, we hold the opinion that local texture information is more important than high-level semantic information even high-level semantic information should be suppressed in the speciﬁc task of forged face de-tection. For this purpose, SPSL drops many convolutional layers to reduce the receptive ﬁeld [3] and forces CNNs to pay more attention to local regions which are abundant in textures and lack high-level semantic information.
As a result, SPSL focuses on the common step in the forged faces generation and pays more attention to textures leading to a performance improvement of the cross-datasets evaluation. At the same time, the performance on multi-class classiﬁcation also improves due to the speciﬁc traces of different categories manipulation are left in the phase spectrum.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that SPSL signiﬁ-cantly improved the transferability and achieved the state-of-the-art over cross-dataset evaluation.
The major contributions in this paper are summarized as follows:
•
•
We ﬁrstly leverage the phase spectrum to detect forged face images and demonstrate that CNNs can capture extra implicit features of the phase spectrum which are beneﬁcial to face forgery detection with precise math-ematical derivation.
Aiming at the speciﬁc problem of forged face detec-tion, we assume that high-level semantic information should be appropriately suppressed. And we experi-mentally validate the hypothesis by decreasing the re-ceptive ﬁeld of CNNs with shallow network learning.
•
We verify that our approach achieves the state-of-the-art performance of forged face detection over cross-dataset evaluation. 2.