Abstract
An emerging line of research has found that spherical spaces better match the underlying geometry of facial im-ages, as evidenced by the state-of-the-art facial recognition methods which beneﬁt empirically from spherical represen-tations. Yet, these approaches rely on deterministic embed-dings and hence suffer from the feature ambiguity dilemma, whereby ambiguous or noisy images are mapped into poorly learned regions of representation space, leading to inaccu-racies. Probabilistic Face Embeddings (PFE) [17] is the
ﬁrst attempt to address this dilemma. However, we theo-retically and empirically identify two main failures of PFE when it is applied to spherical deterministic embeddings aforementioned. To address these issues, in this paper, we propose a novel framework for face conﬁdence learning in spherical space. Mathematically, we extend the von Mises
Fisher density to its r-radius counterpart and derive a new optimization objective in closed form. Theoretically, the proposed probabilistic framework provably allows for bet-ter interpretability, leading to principled feature compari-son and pooling. Extensive experimental results on multiple challenging benchmarks conﬁrm our hypothesis and theory, and showcase the advantages of our framework over prior probabilistic methods and spherical deterministic embed-dings in various face recognition tasks. 1.

Introduction
A plethora of research has demonstrated the advantage of spherical latent space over Euclidean space in modelling certain types of data [4, 14, 22]. Face images are one of these types: as indicated by an emerging line of research, state-of-the-art face recognition methods empirically ben-eﬁt from Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs) that map a face image from input space into spherical space.
This important idea has been explored in a number of re-*Corresponding authors cent works: NormFace pioneered this idea by introducing a normalization operation on both features and weights [18];
SphereFace imposed angular discriminative constraints on hypersphere [12]; CosFace pushed the boundary by adding cosine margin penalty to target logits [19]; and ArcFace further improved the discriminative power of face recogni-tion models by proposing additive angular margin penalty, which is equivalent to minimizing the geodesic distance margin on a hypersphere [3].
However, while achieving clear successes in face recog-nition, all these approaches aim at learning deterministic mappings from input space to feature space, and thus e pur si muove, are unable to capture data uncertainty that is ubiquitous in face recognition in the wild. An ambiguous face, for instance, will be mapped into poorly learned re-gions of the latent space, thus causing a large bias to the facial features of its subject if applied in a deterministic way. First pointed out by Probabilistic Face Embeddings (PFE) [17], this issue was referred to as the Feature Ambi-guity Dilemma, where ambiguous faces are mapped into a
‘dark space’ in which the distance metric is distorted, result-ing in unwanted effects. Such deterministic mappings act as a bottleneck to further improvement of face recognition per-formance, especially in unconstrained environments.
Probabilistic face representation learning presents a promising avenue to addressing this problem. Far from be-ing a novel idea, probabilistic face modelling has been ex-plored abundantly in the literature [1, 16, 7, 11]. Of greatest relevance is PFE [17], which assumes that latent codes obey a multivariate independent Gaussian distribution that is in-herently deﬁned in Euclidean space. While improvements have been made, we identify two main failures when PFE is applied to spherical embeddings. On one hand, theoreti-cally, the independent Gaussian assumption inevitably fails in the case of spherical embeddings. On the other, further empirical studies suggest that the PFE framework leads to unstable training when instantiated with spherical densities, e.g. r-radius von Mises Fisher as proposed. This further limits PFE’s applicability to the state-of-the-art determinis-15629
tic embeddings whose ranges are strictly sphere.
To address the issues of existing approaches, in this pa-per, we propose a novel framework, Sphere Conﬁdence
Face (SCF), for face conﬁdence learning in an r-radius spherical space. Unlike PFE deﬁned in Euclidean space,
SCF captures the most likely feature representation and its local concentration value on spheres. We theoretically show that the concentration value can be interpreted as a measure of conﬁdence, which allows for principled feature compar-ison and pooling, dispensing with the independent Gaus-sian assumption and pairwise training undesired. Com-pared to PFE that maximizes the expectation of the mu-tual likelihood score, our proposed framework minimizes
KL divergence between spherical Dirac delta and r-radius vMF, which proves to be superior for face uncertainty learn-ing through extensive experiments. Code is available at http://github.com/MathsShen/SCF/. 2.