Abstract
Deep CNNs have achieved signiﬁcant successes in im-age processing and its applications, including single image super-resolution (SR). However, conventional methods still resort to some predetermined integer scaling factors, e.g.,
×2 or ×4. Thus, they are difﬁcult to be applied when arbi-trary target resolutions are required. Recent approaches ex-tend the scope to real-valued upsampling factors, even with varying aspect ratios to handle the limitation. In this pa-per, we propose the SRWarp framework to further general-ize the SR tasks toward an arbitrary image transformation.
We interpret the traditional image warping task, speciﬁcally when the input is enlarged, as a spatially-varying SR prob-lem. We also propose several novel formulations, includ-ing the adaptive warping layer and multiscale blending, to reconstruct visually favorable results in the transformation process. Compared with previous methods, we do not con-strain the SR model on a regular grid but allow numerous possible deformations for ﬂexible and diverse image edit-ing. Extensive experiments and ablation studies justify the necessity and demonstrate the advantage of the proposed
SRWarp method under various transformations. 1.

Introduction
As one of the fundamental vision problems, image super-resolution (SR) aims to reconstruct a high-resolution (HR) image from a given low-resolution (LR) input. The SR methods are widely used in several applications such as per-ceptual image enhancement [25, 39], editing [2, 30], and digital zooming [42], due to its practical importance. Sim-ilar to the other vision-related tasks, recent convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved promising SR per-formance with large-scale datasets [1, 27], efﬁcient struc-tures [51, 52, 12], and novel optimization techniques [27, 39]. Recent state-of-the-art methods can reconstruct sharp edges and crisp textures with ﬁne details up to ×4 or ×8 scaling factors on various types of input data including real-world images [50, 4, 41], videos [38, 43, 13, 36, 26], hyper-spectral [9, 48, 45], and light ﬁeld arrays [49, 35, 40]. (a) Input (b) OpenCV (c) SRWarp
Figure 1: Real-world lens distortion correction using the proposed SRWarp. The image is captured by the GoPro
HERO6 handheld camera. Our SRWarp implements SR with locally-varying scale factors, which can be used to transform an input image to the desired geometry.
From the perspective of image editing applications, the
SR algorithm supports users to effectively increase the num-ber of pixels in the image and reconstruct high-frequency details when its HR counterpart is unavailable. Such ma-nipulation may include simple resizing with some prede-ﬁned scaling factors or synthesizing images of arbitrary tar-get resolutions. However, directly applying existing SR methods in these situations is difﬁcult because the mod-els are usually designed to cope with some ﬁxed integer scales [25, 51, 39]. Recently, few methods have extended the scope of the SR to upsample a given image by arbitrary scaling factors [15] and aspect ratios [37]. These novel ap-proaches provide more ﬂexibility and versatility to existing
SR applications for their practical usage.
Nevertheless, existing SR models are not fully optimized for general image editing tasks due to their intrinsic formu-lations. Previous approaches are also designed to take and reconstruct such rectangular frames because digital images are deﬁned on a rectangular grid. On the contrary, images may undergo various deformations in practice to effectively adjust their contents within the context. For instance, ho-mographic transformation [47, 24] aligns images from dif-ferent views, and cameras incorporate various correction al-gorithms to remove distortions from the lens [34, 44]. One of the shortcomings in the conventional warping methods is that interpolation-based algorithms tend to generate blurry results when a local region of the image is stretched. Hence, an appropriate enhancement algorithm is required to pre-7782
serve sharp edges and detailed textures, as the SR methods for image upscaling. However, such applications may re-quire images to be processed on irregular grids, which can-not be handled by na¨ıve CNNs for regular-shaped data.
To prevent blurry warping results, state-of-the-art SR models may be introduced prior to image transformation.
By doing so, supersampled pixels alleviate blurriness and artifacts from simple interpolation. However, Hu et al. [15] and Wang et al. [37] have demonstrated that the solution is suboptimal in the arbitrary-scale SR task. Furthermore, a generalized warping algorithm should deal with more com-plex and even spatially-varying deformations, which are not straightforward to be considered in the previous approaches.
Therefore, an appropriate solution is required to effectively combine the SR and warping methods in a single pipeline.
In this study, we interpret the general image transforma-tion task as a spatially-varying SR problem. For such pur-pose, we construct an end-to-end learnable framework, that is, SRWarp. Different from the previous SR methods, our method is designed to handle the warping problem in two speciﬁc aspects. First, we introduce an adaptive warping layer (AWL) to dynamically predict appropriate resampling kernels for different local distortions. Second, our multi-scale blending strategy combines features of various reso-lutions based on their contents and local deformations to utilize richer information from a given image. With power-ful backbones [27, 39], the proposed SRWarp can success-fully reconstruct image structures that can be missed from conventional warping methods, as shown in Figure 1. Our contributions can be organized in threefolds as follows:
• The novel SRWarp model generalizes the concept of SR under arbitrary transformations and formulates a frame-work to learn image transformation.
• Extensive analysis shows that our adaptive warping layer and multiscale blending contribute to improving the pro-posed SRWarp method.
• Compared with existing methods, our SRWarp model re-construct high-quality details and edges in transformed images, quantitatively and qualitatively. 2.