Abstract
Recent years have seen ﬂourishing research on both semi-supervised learning and 3D room layout reconstruction. In this work, we explore the intersection of these two ﬁelds to advance the research objective of enabling more accu-rate 3D indoor scene modeling with less labeled data. We propose the ﬁrst approach to learn representations of room corners and boundaries by using a combination of labeled and unlabeled data for improved layout estimation in a 360◦ panoramic scene. Through extensive comparative experi-ments, we demonstrate that our approach can advance lay-out estimation of complex indoor scenes using as few as 20 labeled examples. When coupled with a layout predictor pre-trained on synthetic data, our semi-supervised method matches the fully supervised counterpart using only 12% of the labels. Our work takes an important ﬁrst step towards ro-bust semi-supervised layout estimation that can enable many applications in 3D perception with limited labeled data. 1.

Introduction
The task of inferring room layout from a single view 360◦ panoramic image has been gaining much attention from the computer vision community in the past several years. The problem addresses an important step towards holistic indoor scene understanding that can enable structured 3D modeling of the physical environment. Recent state-of-the-art methods
[33, 36, 40] have made substantial progress towards accurate 3D room layout reconstruction by adopting large and power-ful neural network architectures for representation learning.
However, there are several challenges associated with acquir-ing vast quantities of high-quality room layout annotations to supervise deep neural networks. For one, it is difﬁcult to consistently annotate cluttered scenes with ambiguous wall boundaries, especially in rooms with complex layouts that contain many corners. The lack of large-scale labeled data with precise layout annotations for panoramic scenes further hinders the progress of this important problem that has many pertinent applications in 3D computer vision.
At the same time, recent years have seen ﬂourishing re-Figure 1. The effective use of unlabeled data improves complex 3D layout estimation with limited labels. We compare predicted layout boundary lines from a state-of-the-art supervised model [33] trained on 1,650 labels (cyan) with our proposed semi-supervised model (magenta) and show that our model’s predictions follow more closely to the ground truth (green lines) using just 100 labels. search on deep semi-supervised learning (SSL) [3, 34, 37] that can leverage abundant unlabeled data for enhanced learn-ing and generalization in the limited labeled data setting. The success of deep SSL has been mostly demonstrated on the relatively simple task of image classiﬁcation, where the la-beling procedure is the binary indication for the presence or absence of an object class. To our knowledge, the principles of SSL have not been studied in conjunction with room lay-out estimation, a complex and challenging task that depends on ﬁne-grained human annotations, which presents an effec-tive and efﬁcient opportunity to improve learning with few annotated examples, as illustrated in Figure 1. In this work, we propose to explore and evaluate the potential contribution of unlabeled data for 3D room layout estimation, with the 15353
goal of promoting directed research towards the intersection of semi-supervised learning and 3D perception.
Summary of Contributions We present SSLayout360, a neural architecture capable of learning representations of
ﬂoor-wall, ceiling-wall, and wall-wall boundaries from a combination of labeled and unlabeled data for improved room layout estimation in a 360◦ panoramic scene. Our work is the ﬁrst substantive attempt at semi-supervised 3D layout reconstruction of complex indoor scenes using as few as 20 labeled examples.
Through extensive comparative experiments, we show SS-Layout360 achieves new state-of-the-art results on a number of benchmarks for both simple and complex room layouts.
Coupled with a layout predictor pre-trained on synthetic data, SSLayout360 matches the best-in-class fully super-vised baseline using only 12% of the required labels.
We establish the ﬁrst comprehensive set of semi-supervised benchmarks to measure the contribution of un-labeled data for indoor layout estimation. As part of this contribution, we propose a rigorous evaluation protocol to encourage the use of error bounds as standard practice and demonstrate the utility of unlabeled data across many experi-mental settings. We hope that our results serve as a strong baseline to inspire future research towards even more robust semi-supervised 3D layout reconstruction. 2.