Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) can generate high-quality images from sampled latent codes. Recent works attempt to edit an image by manipulating its under-lying latent code, but rarely go beyond the basic task of at-tribute adjustment. We propose the ﬁrst method that enables manipulation with multidimensional condition such as key-points and captions. Speciﬁcally, we design an algorithm that searches for a new latent code that satisﬁes the target condition based on the Surrogate Gradient Field (SGF) in-duced by an auxiliary mapping network. For quantitative comparison, we propose a metric to evaluate the disentan-glement of manipulation methods. Thorough experimental
*Equal contribution. analysis on the facial attribute adjustment task shows that our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods in disen-tanglement. We further apply our method to tasks of var-ious condition modalities to demonstrate that our method can alter complex image properties such as keypoints and captions. 1.

Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks [9], or GANs, are one of the most popular and effective methods for generating high ﬁdelity images.
In the simplest form, the generator model creates a random image from a latent code sampled from the latent space. To create an image that matches some target properties, however, we need a method to condition 6529
the generated image on such properties. In other words, the method should be able to incorporate a piece of information, such as attributes, keypoints, or even an interpretation of the image in a natural language, into the generation of the im-age. Intuitively, to condition the image, we can instead con-dition its latent code on the same information, in an attempt to generate an image that satisﬁes the target properties.
As an increasingly popular approach to image modiﬁca-tion [1] and GAN interpretation [31], latent space manipu-lation is a type of approach that bases on varying the latent codes of images. The generator maps manipulated latent codes to images that hopefully match target properties. To be speciﬁc, InterFaceGAN [31] and GANSpace [11] ﬁnd meaningful directions in latent space, and vary latent codes along these directions to adjust the attributes of images.
Although existing methods explore the potential applica-tion of latent space manipulation, these methods still suffer from the following limitations. To begin with, the disen-tanglement of manipulation can be limited. Adjustment of one attribute of an image is occasionally accompanied by some undesirable shifts in other attributes. Moreover, exist-ing methods are restricted to one-dimensional conditioning.
In other words, these methods excel in adjusting attributes such as smiling or not, female or male, each of which can be parameterized by a scalar condition. However, these meth-ods do not provide a general solution to complex modiﬁca-tions that condition on multidimensional information (e.g. the pose of a human or the caption of an image).
We suggest that there is another line of latent space ma-nipulation based on optimization. Using a generator and an image classiﬁer, we can optimize the latent code for mini-mizing the difference between the properties of the current image and the target properties. Empirically, this simple approach does not work as expected because both the clas-siﬁer and the generator are highly non-convex deep neural networks. As a result, the gradient ﬁeld in the latent space may be misleading, and thus the optimization of a latent vector is often trapped in a local optimum.
To overcome the difﬁculty of the optimization-based ap-proach, we propose a novel method for latent space ma-nipulation. In our method, we train an auxiliary mapping network that induces a Surrogate Gradient Field (SGF). We design an algorithm that uses SGF in search of a new latent code that satisﬁes a target condition. For comparison with existing works, we design a metric that evaluates the disen-tanglement of a manipulation method. Based on the metric, we conduct thorough quantitative experiments and a user study to demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods in the disentanglement of manipulation. As the ﬁrst work towards multidimensional conditioning with latent space manipulation, our method successfully modi-ﬁes images utilizing keypoints and captions, illustrated with qualitative results.
To summarize our main contributions,
• We propose the ﬁrst latent space manipulation method of GANs that supports multidimensional conditioning.
• We conduct quantitative experiments and a user study on the task of facial attribute adjustment to demon-strate that our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods in disentanglement.
• We apply our method to latent space manipulation us-ing keypoints and captions, justifying our method as a uniﬁed approach for various modalities of condition-ing. 2.