Abstract
Temporal action proposal generation aims to estimate temporal intervals of actions in untrimmed videos, which is a challenging yet important task in the video understanding
ﬁeld. The proposals generated by current methods still suf-fer from inaccurate temporal boundaries and inferior conﬁ-dence used for retrieval owing to the lack of efﬁcient tempo-ral modeling and effective boundary context utilization. In this paper, we propose Temporal Context Aggregation Net-work (TCANet) to generate high-quality action proposals through “local and global” temporal context aggregation and complementary as well as progressive boundary reﬁne-ment. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst design a Local-Global Tempo-ral Encoder (LGTE), which adopts the channel grouping strategy to efﬁciently encode both “local and global” tem-poral inter-dependencies. Furthermore, both the boundary and internal context of proposals are adopted for frame-level and segment-level boundary regressions, respectively.
Temporal Boundary Regressor (TBR) is designed to com-bine these two regression granularities in an end-to-end fashion, which achieves the precise boundaries and reli-able conﬁdence of proposals through progressive reﬁne-ment. Extensive experiments are conducted on three chal-lenging datasets: HACS, ActivityNet-v1.3, and THUMOS-14, where TCANet can generate proposals with high pre-cision and recall. By combining with the existing action classiﬁer, TCANet can obtain remarkable temporal action detection performance compared with other methods. Not surprisingly, the proposed TCANet won the 1st place in the
CVPR 2020 - HACS challenge leaderboard on temporal ac-tion localization task.
∗ The work was done during an internship at SenseTime.
† Corresponding author.
Background (cid:2175)(cid:2202)(cid:2183)(cid:2200)(cid:2202)
Skiing
Background (cid:2161)(cid:2196)(cid:2186)
Local Temporal Encoder
Global Temporal Encoder
LGTE
Encoded 
Feature
Starting Context
Candidate Proposal
Internal Context
Ending Context
TBR
Start-Boundary 
Regression
Segment- Level 
Regression
End-Boundary 
Regression
Segment-Level Regression Output
Frame-Level Regression Output
Fused Output
Figure 1. Overview of our proposed method. Given an untrimmed video, TCANet captures the “local and global” temporal relation-ships in parallel by LGTE. In TBR, the internal and boundary con-text of proposals are utilized for segment-level boundary regres-sion and frame-level boundary regression, respectively. 1.

Introduction
The temporal action detection task requires locating the starting and ending time of action instances from long untrimmed videos and classifying the actions. This task can be applied to many ﬁelds, such as video content analysis and video recommendation. Most existing temporal action de-tection methods follow a two-stage scheme [35, 26], namely temporal action proposal generation and classiﬁcation. Al-though action recognition methods [37, 5] have achieved impressive classiﬁcation accuracy, the temporal action de-tection performance is still unsatisfactory in several main-stream benchmarks [14, 2, 45]. Hence, many researchers target improving the quality of temporal action proposals.
Current proposal generation methods can be mainly di-vided into two steps. First, the temporal relationship is cap-tured by stacked temporal convolutions [20, 18, 16, 30, 29] 485
or global temporal pooling operations [8]. Then propos-als are further generated by the boundary-based regres-sion methods [20, 18] or the anchor-based regression meth-ods [24, 9, 7, 4, 21, 8]. However, existing methods share the following drawbacks: (1) Neither convolution nor global fusion can effectively model the temporal relationship. The 1D convolution operations [20, 18, 16] lack ﬂexibility in en-coding long-term temporal relationships limited by kernel size. The global fusion methods [8] neglect various global dependencies for each temporal location and the implicit attention to local details, such as local details of bound-aries. Besides, simply collecting global features through average pooling may introduce unnecessary noise. (2) Only the internal context or boundary context of proposals used for regression is inferior to generate proposals with precise boundaries. The internal context of proposals adopted in anchor-based methods can obtain reliable conﬁdence scores but fails to generate precise boundaries. On the contrary, the boundary context of proposals considered in boundary-based methods is sensitive to boundary changes but gener-ates proposals with inferior proposal-level conﬁdence.
−
To relieve these issues, we propose Temporal Context
Aggregation Network (TCANet) for high-quality proposal reﬁnement, as shown in Figure 1. First, the Local-Global
Temporal Encoder (LGTE) is proposed to simultaneously capture local and global temporal relationships in a channel grouping fashion, which contains two main sub-modules.
Speciﬁcally, the input features after linear transformation are equally divided into N groups along the channel dimen-sion. Then Local Temporal Encoder (LTE) is designed to handle the ﬁrst A groups for local temporal modeling. At the same time, the remaining N
A groups are captured by the Global Temporal Encoder (GTE) for global infor-mation perception. In this way, LGTE is expected to inte-grate the long-term context of proposals by global groups while recovering more structure and detailed information by local groups. Second, the Temporal Boundary Regres-sor (TBR) is proposed to exploit both boundary context and internal context of proposals for frame-level and segment-level boundary regressions, respectively. Concretely, the frame-level boundary regression aims to reﬁne the starting and ending locations of candidate proposals with bound-ary sensitivity, while the segment-level boundary regression aims to reﬁne the center location and duration of propos-als under the overall perception of proposals. Finally, high-quality proposals are obtained through complementary fu-sion and progressive boundary reﬁnements.
In summary, our contributions mainly have three folds:
• We design a Local-Global Temporal Encoder to simul-taneously capture local and global temporal relation-ships in a channel grouping fashion. It can be easily embedded into any other proposal generation frame-works for efﬁcient temporal relationships modeling.
• Temporal Boundary Regressor is proposed to perform complementary and progressive boundary reﬁnements, including the local frame-level boundary regression and global segment-level boundary regression.
• Extensive experiments reveal that TCANet can obtain convincing proposals performance on several bench-marks: HACS, ActivityNet-v1.3, and THUMOS-14.
By combining with the existing classiﬁer, TCANet can achieve remarkable temporal action detection perfor-mance compared with other approaches. 2.