Abstract
The success of deep learning has led to intense growth and interest in computer vision, along with concerns about its potential impact on society. Yet we know little about how these changes have affected the people that research and practice computer vision: we as a community spend so much effort trying to replicate the abilities of humans, but so little time considering the impact of this work on ourselves.
In this paper, we report on a study in which we asked com-puter vision researchers and practitioners to write stories about emotionally-salient events that happened to them.
Our analysis of over 50 responses found tremendous af-fective (emotional) strain in the computer vision commu-nity. While many describe excitement and success, we found strikingly frequent feelings of isolation, cynicism, apathy, and exasperation over the state of the ﬁeld. This is espe-cially true among people who do not share the unbridled enthusiasm for normative standards for computer vision re-search and who do not see themselves as part of the “in-crowd.” Our ﬁndings suggest that these feelings are closely tied to the kinds of research and professional practices now expected in computer vision. We argue that as a community with signiﬁcant stature, we need to work towards an inclu-sive culture that makes transparent and addresses the real emotional toil of its members. 1.

Introduction
By almost any metric, computer vision is in a golden age. Deep learning has revolutionized nearly every prob-lem in computer vision, achieving results that were unimag-inable just a few years ago. As technical barriers have fallen, the ﬂoodgates of interest in computer vision have opened wide [40]. CVPR 2019 had over 9,000 attendees – nearly ten times more than CVPR 2009 – and paper sub-missions were growing exponentially, leading the 2019 Pro-gram Chairs to cheekily extrapolate that CVPR 2028 will surpass 10 billion submissions [5]. to computer vision. According to Google Scholar, CVPR is the ﬁfth most impactful publication venue of all jour-nals and conferences in all of science [2], just below The
Lancet and signiﬁcantly above PNAS. Governments around the world have announced major investments in AI research over the next decade [14, 37], and academic grants are in-creasingly focused on proposals integrating machine learn-ing, sometimes with industry backing [3]. Major tech com-panies are investing billions of dollars into computer vision and machine learning [4] and paying eye-popping salaries to attract top talent [32].
Despite all this apparent success, it is clear that com-puter vision is facing a number of important challenges.
The thousands of papers published every year in computer vision – and the popularity of arXiv as an instant publica-tion venue – have made it impossible for any individual to follow all developments in the ﬁeld. Peer review processes are straining under the huge inﬂux of paper submissions and the limited number of qualiﬁed reviewers, leading to accep-tance decisions that may often be arbitrary [26]. Faculty spending time in industry may harm student success [33], but those staying in academia ﬁnd it increasingly difﬁcult to compute against the computational, data, and human re-sources of industry labs. Researchers in industry enjoy much of the freedom of academia, but without the formal protections of tenure [34]. Meanwhile, there is a striking lack of diversity across gender and race in AI [49].
There is also growing alarm about the ethical conse-quences of computer vision, from self-driving cars that have killed people due to perception failures [22], to surveillance technology that could become a tool of repression [18], to the exploitation of low-income workers for labeling training data [50], to face recognition algorithms that exhibit racial bias [12]. Major datasets that have been the bedrock of com-puter vision research for a decade have been found to in-advertently include biased, racist, and misogynistic images and labels, leading the Tiny Images dataset to be formally retracted [47] and hundreds of thousands of images to be removed from ImageNet [44].
Meanwhile, the rest of the world is paying attention
It is against this backdrop that we, the researchers and 19291
practitioners of the computer vision community, live and work. Given the ﬁeld’s implicit goal to build models that can match or beat human perceptual capabilities – to, ar-guably, “replace” humans – it is perhaps unsurprising that there has been little work studying the effect that this envi-ronment has had on those working in the ﬁeld. The work of computer vision – just like any tech work [24, 31] – is laden with emotion: the joys of solving a problem, the sting of a paper rejection, the anxiety of ﬁnding a job or attaining tenure, the envy for others who are better known, the con-cern about ethical implications. These emotions orient how one behaves and drive the trajectory of the community [20].
In this paper, we set out to investigate the “affects” (emo-tions) of working in the modern vision community. We in-vited several hundred computer vision and machine learn-ing researchers to participate in a study in which we asked them to write a short story about a recent, speciﬁc inci-dent involving their work that was emotionally salient to them. We collected and analyzed 56 stories from a wide range of informants, ranging from ﬁrst-year Ph.D. students to prominent senior researchers in academia and industry.
While many report being excited about the progress in the
ﬁeld, we were struck by the number of stories indicating nostalgia about the past and worry about where the ﬁeld is going. Many informants seem to feel isolated and are struggling to ﬁnd their place within the ﬁeld. Some were so nervous about the consequences of sharing their stories that they were only willing to communicate with us anony-mously through a third party.
We are well aware that this is not a typical CVPR pa-per: we beat no benchmarks, we introduce no datasets, we present no novel loss functions. But we argue that this type of work is nevertheless of central importance to CVPR, not to be sidelined off its main track. We identify how the growth of computer vision has affected a diverse range of individuals; these affects cannot be measured in terms of aggregate quantitative metrics. This paper seeks to amplify these emotions, with the goal of taking a ﬁrst step towards a longer-term conversation about where our community is going and how to ensure that it is vibrant for all. 2.