Abstract
Satellite imagery analytics have numerous human de-velopment and disaster response applications, particularly when time series methods are involved. For example, quan-tifying population statistics is fundamental to 67 of the 231
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals Indicators, but the World Bank estimates that over 100 countries cur-rently lack effective Civil Registration systems. To help ad-dress this deﬁcit and develop novel computer vision meth-ods for time series data, we present the Multi-Temporal
Urban Development SpaceNet (MUDS, also known as
SpaceNet 7) dataset. This open source dataset consists of medium resolution (4.0m) satellite imagery mosaics, which includes ≈ 24 images (one per month) covering > 100 unique geographies, and comprises > 40, 000 km2 of im-agery and exhaustive polygon labels of building footprints therein, totaling over 11M individual annotations. Each building is assigned a unique identiﬁer (i.e. address), which permits tracking of individual objects over time. Label ﬁ-delity exceeds image resolution; this “omniscient labeling” is a unique feature of the dataset, and enables surpris-ingly precise algorithmic models to be crafted. We demon-strate methods to track building footprint construction (or demolition) over time, thereby directly assessing urban-ization. Performance is measured with the newly devel-oped SpaceNet Change and Object Tracking (SCOT) met-ric, which quantiﬁes both object tracking as well as change detection. We demonstrate that despite the moderate reso-lution of the data, we are able to track individual building identiﬁers over time. 1.

Introduction
Time series analysis of satellite imagery poses an inter-esting computer vision challenge, with many human devel-opment applications. We aim to advance this ﬁeld through the release of a large dataset aimed at enabling new methods in this domain. Beyond its relevance for disaster response, disease preparedness, and environmental monitoring, time series analysis of satellite imagery poses unique technical challenges often unaddressed by existing methods.
The MUDS dataset (also known as SpaceNet 7) consists of imagery and precise building footprint labels over dy-namic areas for two dozen months, with each building as-signed a unique identiﬁer (see Section 3 for further details).
In the algorithmic portion of this paper (Section 5), we fo-cus on tracking building footprints to monitor construction and demolition in satellite imagery time series. We aim to identify all of the buildings in each image of the time series and assign identiﬁers to track the buildings over time.
Timely, high-ﬁdelity foundational maps are critical to a great many domains. For example, high-resolution maps help identify communities at risk for natural and human-derived disasters. Furthermore, identifying new building construction in satellite imagery is an important factor in establishing population estimates in many areas (e.g. [8]).
Population estimates are also essential for assessing burden on infrastructure, from roads[4] to medical facilities [28].
The inclusion of individual building identiﬁers is a unique feature of the MUDS dataset, and enables potential improvements upon existing course population estimates.
Without unique identiﬁers building tracking is not possible; this means that over a given area one can only determine how many new buildings exist. By tracking unique build-ing identiﬁers one can determine which buildings changed (whose properties such as precise location, area, etc. can be correlated with features such as road access, distance to hospitals, etc.), thus providing a much more granular view into population growth.
Several unusual features of satellite imagery (e.g. small object size, high object density, dramatic image-to-image difference compared to frame-to-frame variation in video object tracking, different color band wavelengths and counts, limited texture information, drastic changes in shad-ows, and repeating patterns) are relevant to other tasks and
† This work was completed prior to Nicholas Weir, Ryan Lewis joining Amazon. 16398
data. For example, pathology slide images or other mi-croscopy data present many of the same challenges [41].
Lessons learned from this dataset may therefore have broad-reaching relevance to the computer vision community.
SpaceNet 7 is both a dataset and a NeurIPS 2020 com-petition. This paper details the dataset, metric, and baseline algorithm. See [9] for details on the SpaceNet 7 Challenge. 2.