Abstract
Surgical skills have a great inﬂuence on surgical safety and patients’ well-being. Traditional assessment of sur-gical skills involves strenuous manual efforts, which lacks efﬁciency and repeatability. Therefore, we attempt to au-tomatically predict how well the surgery is performed us-ing the surgical video. In this paper, a uniﬁed multi-path framework for automatic surgical skill assessment is pro-posed, which takes care of multiple composing aspects of surgical skills, including surgical tool usage, intraoperative event pattern, and other skill proxies. The dependency rela-tionships among these different aspects are specially mod-eled by a path dependency module in the framework. We conduct extensive experiments on the JIGSAWS dataset of simulated surgical tasks, and a new clinical dataset of real laparoscopic surgeries. The proposed framework achieves promising results on both datasets, with the state-of-the-art on the simulated dataset advanced from 0.71 Spearman’s correlation to 0.80. It is also shown that combining multi-ple skill aspects yields better performance than relying on a single aspect. 1.

Introduction
Hundreds of millions of surgeries are performed world-wide annually [57]. The proﬁciency of the operating sur-geon is a key factor affecting outcomes after surgery [8].
To ensure patient safety and reduce clinical errors, surgical skill assessment has become an indispensable part of surgi-cal training [47] and credentialing [56].
Conventional surgical skill assessment is undertaken manually by experts with direct observation [47] or struc-tured rating protocols [35]. Such human assessment is slow and hardly reproducible. Meanwhile, the prevalence of la-paroscopic and robot-assisted surgeries nowadays brings a large volume of surgery videos captured by the built-in cam-1) Tool 
Usage 2) Field 
Clearness 3) Event 
Pattern
Tool Movement
Dissection Area
Procedural Event
Adverse Event
High Skill
Low Skill
Figure 1. Different aspects of surgical skills. Surgical skills can be assessed from many aspects, e.g., 1) the usage of surgical tools 2) the clearness of the operating ﬁeld 3) the distribution of surgical events. This paper proposes a uniﬁed framework for surgical skill assessment, which exploits these different aspects and the interac-tion among them. Best viewed in color. eras in surgical devices, which lay the foundation for au-tomatic learning-based approaches to provide efﬁcient and repeatable skill assessment [52]. This paper works on auto-matic surgical skill assessment using surgical videos.
Surgical skills are complex with many facets. No univer-sally accepted skill assessment criterion exists in the med-ical ﬁeld currently [10]. By discussion with clinicians, we identify three important aspects from the medical literature that are likely to characterize surgical skills and also suit-able for automatic assessment, i.e., surgical tool usage, sur-gical ﬁeld clearness, and surgical event pattern. The ﬁrst aspect is the movement of surgical tools [19, 36], which could reﬂect the instrument handling proﬁciency and mo-tion efﬁciency of the surgeon. As in Fig. 1, a high-skill surgeon will have a short and smooth tool trajectory con-9522
centrating on the dissection area, while a low-skill surgeon will have a lengthy and jerky trajectory dispersed in a large spatial range. The second aspect is the clearness of the op-erating ﬁeld as a skill proxy [31]. Skill proxy means an indi-rect indicator that is statistically correlated to surgical skills.
Concretely, a clear operating ﬁeld ensures high visibility of anatomy structures, which is critical for the surgeon’s per-formance. And it is more likely to link a poorly-performed surgery to an obscure ﬁeld with excessive bleeding, burnt tissue, smoke, and thus limited anatomy visibility. The third aspect is the workﬂow of surgical events or actions [50]. For example in Fig. 1, a well-performed surgery tends to have a linear pattern of events following the optimal procedure.
On the contrary, a loopy pattern with more jumps across events is more common in a poorly-performed surgery, be-cause the surgeon could ﬁnd some previous surgical step unsatisfactory and go back to ﬁx it. Besides, skill-related factors are also major causes of adverse events in surgeries, such as bleeding and injury [60].
Prior works on automated surgical skill assessment, e.g. [46, 24, 31], mostly rely on one of these aspects. How-ever, we believe the great complexity of surgical skills ne-cessitates a combination of multiple aspects for an accurate assessment. Besides, the dependency relationships among different aspects also play important roles in skill assess-ment. For instance, tool usage needs to be more care-ful when the ﬁeld clearness is impaired. This paper thus conceptualizes a uniﬁed framework to leverage the com-plementary information in different skill aspects and also capture dependencies among aspects. The proposed frame-work comprises multiple paths in parallel, with each cor-responding to a skill aspect. Aspect-speciﬁc feature se-quences extracted from surgical videos are forwarded along each path, subsequently transformed into skill score se-quences for each aspect. We integrate a path dependency module into the framework to capture inter-path dependen-cies. In this module, feature sequences are aggregated from all the skill aspects to provide temporal importance weights for the score sequences. Lastly, the weighted score se-quences are pooled over time and fused across paths as the
ﬁnal assessment prediction. One practical problem of sur-gical skill assessment is the limited amount of annotations for training. Therefore, apart from a classic supervised re-gression loss, the framework is additionally equipped with a self-supervised contrastive loss to learn without annota-tions. Speciﬁcally, we employ a predictive coding mecha-nism on the latent embedding of feature sequences.
On the other hand, existing approaches are usually vali-dated on simulated surgical tasks, such as knot-tying in the
JIGSAWS benchmark [18, 2]. However, a clinical dataset of real surgeries is more desirable. And it is better to also have event and tool annotations to support multi-aspect assess-ment. The clinical dataset in EndoVis Challenge 2019 [1] satisﬁes these requirements, which is unfortunately not pub-licly usable yet. Therefore, we collect a new clinical dataset consisting of twenty in vivo laparoscopic gastrectomies with comprehensive skill and event annotations. The proposed framework is validated by extensive experiments on our new clinical dataset and the simulated JIGSAWS dataset.
On both datasets, instantiations of the proposed frame-work obtain state-of-the-art results. Experimental results are higher when multiple skill aspects are combined, val-idating the effectiveness of our uniﬁed approach. We also correlate the predicted skill scores with the input features on the temporal dimension to get insights on how the model understands surgical skills.
To summarize, our contributions are three-fold: 1) A uni-ﬁed framework assessing surgical skills from multiple as-pects 2) A new clinical surgery dataset 3) Promising results on both simulated and clinical surgery datasets. 2.