Abstract
Humans have a natural instinct to identify unknown ob-ject instances in their environments. The intrinsic curiosity about these unknown instances aids in learning about them, when the corresponding knowledge is eventually available.
This motivates us to propose a novel computer vision prob-lem called: ‘Open World Object Detection’, where a model is tasked to: 1) identify objects that have not been intro-duced to it as ‘unknown’, without explicit supervision to do so, and 2) incrementally learn these identiﬁed unknown cat-egories without forgetting previously learned classes, when the corresponding labels are progressively received. We formulate the problem, introduce a strong evaluation pro-tocol and provide a novel solution, which we call ORE:
Open World Object Detector, based on contrastive cluster-ing and energy based unknown identiﬁcation. Our experi-mental evaluation and ablation studies analyse the efﬁcacy of ORE in achieving Open World objectives. As an interest-ing by-product, we ﬁnd that identifying and characterising unknown instances helps to reduce confusion in an incre-mental object detection setting, where we achieve state-of-the-art performance, with no extra methodological effort.
We hope that our work will attract further research into this newly identiﬁed, yet crucial research direction.1 1.

Introduction
Deep learning has accelerated progress in Object Detec-tion research [14, 54, 19, 31, 52], where a model is tasked to identify and localise objects in an image. All existing ap-proaches work under a strong assumption that all the classes that are to be detected would be available at training phase.
Two challenging scenarios arises when we relax this as-sumption: 1) A test image might contain objects from un-known classes, which should be classiﬁed as unknown. 2)
As and when information (labels) about such identiﬁed un-knowns become available, the model should be able to in-crementally learn the new class. Research in developmen-tal psychology [41, 36] ﬁnds out that the ability to iden-tify what one doesn’t know, is key in captivating curiosity. 1Source code: https://github.com/JosephKJ/OWOD
Problem Difficulty
Detection
Shmelkov et al., [ICCV’17]
Chen et al. [IJCNN’19]
Hao et al. [ICME’19]
Ours: Open-world 
Detection
Classification
Zenke et al. [JMLR’17]
Rebuffi et al. [CVPR’17]
Chaudhry et al. [ICLR’18]
Mallya et al. [CVPR’18]
Aljundi et al. [ECCV’18]
Rajasegaran et al. [NeurIPS’19]
Miller et al. [ICRA’18] 
Miller et al. [ICRA’19] 
Dhamija et al. [WACV’20] 
Scheireret al. [TPAMI’14]
Bendale et al. [CVPR’16]
Neal et al., [CVPR’18]
Yoshihashi et al. [CVPR’19]
Pereraet al. [CVPR’20]
Open Set Learning
Incremental Learning
Bendale and Boult [CVPR’15]
Figure 1: Open World Object Detection (F) is a novel problem that has not been formally deﬁned and addressed so far. Though related to the Open Set and Open World classiﬁcation, Open World
Object Detection offers its own unique challenges, which when addressed, improves the practicality of object detectors.
Such a curiosity fuels the desire to learn new things [9, 16].
This motivates us to propose a new problem where a model should be able to identify instances of unknown objects as unknown and subsequently learns to recognise them when training data progressively arrives, in a uniﬁed way. We call this problem setting as Open World Object Detection.
The number of classes that are annotated in standard vi-sion datasets like Pascal VOC [10] and MS-COCO [32] are very low (20 and 80 respectively) when compared to the in-ﬁnite number of classes that are present in the open world.
Recognising an unknown as an unknown requires strong generalization. Scheirer et al. [57] formalises this as Open
Set classiﬁcation problem. Henceforth, various methodolo-gies (using 1-vs-rest SVMs and deep learning models) has been formulated to address this challenging setting. Ben-dale et al. [3] extends Open Set to an Open World classiﬁ-cation setting by additionally updating the image classiﬁer to recognise the identiﬁed new unknown classes. Interest-ingly, as seen in Fig. 1, Open World object detection is un-explored, owing to the difﬁculty of the problem setting.
The advances in Open Set and Open World image clas-siﬁcation cannot be trivially adapted to Open Set and Open
World object detection, because of a fundamental difference in the problem setting: The object detector is trained to de-tect unknown objects as background.
Instances of many unknown classes would have been already introduced to 5830
the object detector along with known objects. As they are not labelled, these unknown instances would be explicitly learned as background, while training the detection model.
Dhamija et al. [8] ﬁnds that even with this extra training sig-nal, the state-of-the-art object detectors results in false pos-itive detections, where the unknown objects end up being classiﬁed as one of the known classes, often with very high probability. Miller et al. [43] proposes to use dropout sam-pling to get an estimate of the uncertainty of the object de-tection prediction. This is the only peer-reviewed research work in the open set object detection literature. Our pro-posed Open World Object Detection goes a step further to incrementally learn the new classes, once they are detected as unknown and an oracle provides labels for the objects of interest among all the unknowns. To the best of our knowl-edge this has not been tried in the literature. Fig. 1 shows a taxonomy of existing research work in this space.
The Open World Object Detection setting is much more natural than the existing closed-world, static-learning set-ting. The world is diverse and dynamic in the number, type and conﬁgurations of novel classes. It would be naive to assume that all the classes to expect at inference are seen during training. Practical deployments of detection systems in robotics, self-driving cars, plant phenotyping, healthcare and surveillance cannot afford to have complete knowledge on what classes to expect at inference time, while being trained in-house. The most natural and realistic behav-ior that one can expect from an object detection algorithm deployed in such settings would be to conﬁdently predict an unknown object as unknown, and known objects into the corresponding classes. As and when more information about the identiﬁed unknown classes becomes available, the system should be able to incorporate them into its existing knowledge base. This would deﬁne a smart object detection system, and ours is an effort towards achieving this goal.
The key contributions of our work are:
• We introduce a novel problem setting, Open World Ob-ject Detection, which models the real-world more closely.
• We develop a novel methodology, called ORE, based on contrastive clustering, an unknown-aware proposal net-work and energy based unknown identiﬁcation to address the challenges of open world detection.
• We introduce a comprehensive experimental setting, which helps to measure the open world characteristics of an object detector, and benchmark ORE on it against competitive baseline methods.
• As an interesting by-product, the proposed methodology achieves state-of-the-art performance on Incremental Ob-ject Detection, even though not primarily designed for it. 2.