Abstract
Depth maps obtained by commercial depth sensors are always in low-resolution, making it difﬁcult to be used in various computer vision tasks. Thus, depth map super-resolution (SR) is a practical and valuable task, which up-scales the depth map into high-resolution (HR) space. How-ever, limited by the lack of real-world paired low-resolution (LR) and HR depth maps, most existing methods use down-sampling to obtain paired training samples. To this end, we ﬁrst construct a large-scale dataset named “RGB-D-D”, which can greatly promote the study of depth map SR and even more depth-related real-world tasks. The “D-D” in our dataset represents the paired LR and HR depth maps captured from mobile phone and Lucid Helios respectively ranging from indoor scenes to challenging outdoor scenes.
Besides, we provide a fast depth map super-resolution (FDSR) baseline, in which the high-frequency component adaptively decomposed from RGB image to guide the depth map SR. Extensive experiments on existing public datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and efﬁciency of our network compared with the state-of-the-art methods. Moreover, for the real-world LR depth maps, our algorithm can produce more accurate HR depth maps with clearer boundaries and to some extent correct the depth value errors. 1.

Introduction
As a supplement of the RGB modality, the depth map can provide useful depth information, which has been applied in bokeh rendering [25], AR modeling [26], face recogni-tion [3], gesture recognition [27], etc. Meanwhile, the low-power depth sensors equipped on mobile consumer elec-tronics, such as Huawei and Samsung, have been popular in our daily life. However, the resolution of depth maps
*Corresponding author: yzhao@bjtu.edu.cn
Figure 1. RGB-D-D dataset display and depth map SR results comparison. Depth map SR results given by DKN [16] and FDSR is shown in the last two columns. The quantitive results in terms of RMSE is shown blow each row (lower is better). The runing time of DKN [16] and FDSR is shown on the top of the ﬁgure. cannot match the resolution of RGB images, limiting prac-tical applications to some extent. Therefore, investigating the depth map SR is an effective solution for this issue.
Furthermore, downsampling as a straightforward strategy has been widely used in the existing depth map SR algo-rithms [16, 23] to construct paired training samples. But the downsampling manner fails to comprehensively simu-late the real-world complex correspondences between the
LR and HR depth maps. To bridge this gap, we construct the ﬁrst benchmark dataset towards the real-world depth map SR. Furthermore, to meet the actual application re-quirements, we provide a fast and accurate depth map SR baseline model.
The existing “RGB-D” depth map SR datasets [37, 5, 13] mainly focus on using a single HR depth map to generate paired LR and HR depth map correspondences through the downsampling strategy. In the real applications, the depth map SR task is more challenging and complicated because the real LR depth maps captured by depth sensors generally contain some noise even depth holes. Therefore, for the real scenes and real correspondences, we construct a large-scale 9229
paired depth map SR dataset named “RGB-D-D”, which in-cludes 4811 paired samples ranging from indoor scenes to challenging outdoor scenes. The “D-D” in our dataset rep-resents the paired LR and HR depth maps captured from the mobile phone (LR sensors) and Lucid Helios (HR sen-sors) [1], respectively. The dataset can offer two LR depth maps as input to evaluate the depth map SR task: LR depth map downsampled from the HR ground truth like previous research, and the raw LR depth map captured by LR sensor facing the real application scene. Besides, our dataset can contribute to many popular application scenarios of mobile phone and other depth-related tasks, such as portrait pho-tography [25], object modeling [17], depth estimation [20], depth completion [44], etc.
Although numerous algorithms have been proposed for depth map SR and presented impressive performance, there are still some unsatisfactory points in detail preserv-ing, computation complexity, and real-world application.
Firstly, the sharp boundaries and elaborate details in the depth map SR are hard to recover especially when the scal-ing factor is large. Therefore, color image guided meth-ods [41, 43] are introduced to solve this problem. Different from them, we design a high-frequency guided multi-scale dilated structure to introduce the color guidance in an im-age decomposition manner and exploit the contextual in-formation under different receptive ﬁelds. Secondly, to be applied on the platforms of the mobile devices and embed-ded systems, the depth map SR algorithms should take into account both the efﬁciency and accuracy. Inspired by [6], we design a high-frequency layer in our network, where the high-frequency features from RGB image are only used as the guidance in the early stages of depth map reconstruction branch, and the low-frequency components are suppressed to reduce the parameters. Lastly, the existing methods use downsample operation to get paired HR and LR depth maps for training which fails to simulate the real correspondences between HR and LR depth maps. We use the paired depth maps in RGB-D-D dataset to train a model, which greatly improve the value accuracy and visual effects in the real-world depth map SR task.
Focused on the real-world applications and the practical demands, we construct a large-scale and real-world depth map SR benchmark dataset and provide a fast solution for the depth map SR task. The contributions are highlighted in the following aspects:
• We build the ﬁrst and large-scale depth map SR bench-mark dataset named RGB-D-D dataset1, towards the real scenes and real correspondences. This dataset bridges the gap between theoretical research and real-world applications, and also ﬂourishes the depth-related tasks in terms of benchmark dataset. 1Refer to http://mepro.bjtu.edu.cn/resource.html for the RGB-D-D dataset download link.
• We design a fast depth map super-resolution (FDSR) baseline, in which a high-frequency guided multi-scale structure is introduced to provide the frequency guid-ance and exploit the contextual information. Such de-composition strategy can improve the efﬁciency while retaining the reconstruction performance.
• Our network achieves the superior performance on the public datasets and our RGB-D-D benchmark dataset in terms of the speed and accuracy. Moreover, for the real-world depth map SR task, our algorithm can gen-erate more accurate results with clearer boundaries and to some extent correct the value errors. 2.