Abstract
Tracking humans in crowded video sequences is an scene understanding. important constituent of visual
Increasing crowd density challenges visibility of humans, limiting the scalability of existing pedestrian trackers to higher crowd densities. For that reason, we propose to revitalize head tracking with Crowd of Heads Dataset (CroHD), consisting of 9 sequences of 11,463 frames with over 2,276,838 heads and 5,230 tracks annotated in diverse scenes. For evaluation, we proposed a new metric, IDEucl, to measure an algorithm’s efﬁcacy in preserving a unique identity for the longest stretch in image coordinate space, thus building a correspondence between pedestrian crowd motion and the performance of a tracking algorithm. More-over, we also propose a new head detector, HeadHunter, which is designed for small head detection in crowded scenes. We extend HeadHunter with a Particle Filter and a color histogram based re-identiﬁcation module for head tracking. To establish this as a strong baseline, we com-pare our tracker with existing state-of-the-art pedestrian trackers on CroHD and demonstrate superiority, especially in identity preserving tracking metrics. With a light-weight head detector and a tracker which is efﬁcient at identity preservation, we believe our contributions will serve useful in advancement of pedestrian tracking in dense crowds. We make our dataset, code and models publicly available at https://project.inria.fr/crowdscience/ project/dense-crowd-head-tracking/. 1.

Introduction
Tracking multiple objects, especially humans, is a cen-tral problem in visual scene understanding. The intricacy of this task grows with increasing targets to be tracked and remains an open area of research. Alike other subﬁelds in
Computer Vision, with the advent of Deep Learning, the task of Multiple Object Tracking (MOT) has remarkably advanced its benchmarks [12, 24, 25, 37, 42, 61] since its
Figure 1. Comparison between head detection and full body de-tection in a crowded scene from CroHD. HeadHunter detects 36 heads whereas Faster-RCNN [48] can detect only 23 pedestrians out of 37 present in this scene. inception [21]. In the recent past, the focus of MOTChal-lenge benchmark [13] has shifted towards tracking pedes-trians in crowds of higher density. This has several appli-cations in ﬁelds such as activity recognition, anomaly de-tection, robot navigation, visual surveillance, safety plan-ning etc. Yet, the performances of trackers on these bench-mark suggests a trend of saturation1. Majority of online tracking algorithms today follow the tracking-by-detection paradigm and several research works have well-established object detector’s performance to be crucial in tracker’s per-formance [3, 5, 11]. As the pedestrian density in a scene increases, pedestrian visibility reduces with increasing mu-tual occlusions, leading to reduced pedestrian detection as visualized in Figure 1. To tackle these challenges yet track humans efﬁciently in densely crowded environments, we rekindle the task of MOT with tracking humans by their distinctly visible part - heads. To that end, we propose a new dataset, CroHD, Crowd of Heads Dataset, comprising 9 sequences of 11,463 frames with head bounding boxes an-notated for tracking. We hope that this new dataset opens 1https://motchallenge.net/results/MOT20/ 3865
up opportunities for promising future research to better un-derstand global pedestrian motion in dense crowds.
Supplementing this, we develop two new baseline meth-ods on CroHD, a head detector, HeadHunter and a head tracker, HeadHunter-T. We design HeadHunter peculiar for head detection in crowded environments, distinct from standard pedestrian detectors and demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on an existing head detection dataset.
HeadHunter-T extends HeadHunter with a Particle Filter framework and a light-weight re-identiﬁcation module for head-tracking. To validate HeadHunter-T to be a strong baseline tracker, we compare it with three published top per-forming pedestrian trackers on the crowded MOTChallenge benchmark, evaluated on CroHD. We further perform com-parisons between tracking by head detection and tracking by body detection to illustrate the value of our contribution.
To establish correspondence between a tracking algo-rithm and pedestrian motion, it is necessary to understand the adequacy of various trackers in successfully represent-ing ground truth pedestrian trajectories. We thus propose a new metric, IDEucl to evaluate tracking algorithms based on their consistency in maintaining the same identity for the longest length of a ground truth trajectory in the image co-ordinate space. IDEucl is compatible with our dataset and can be extended to any tracking benchmark, recorded with a static camera.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions (i) We present a new dataset, CroHD, with annotated pedes-trian heads for tracking in dense crowd, (ii) We propose a baseline head detector for CroHD, HeadHunter, (iii) We de-velop HeadHunter-T, by extending HeadHunter as the base-line head tracker for CroHD, (iv) We propose a new metric,
IDEucl, to evaluate the efﬁciency of trackers in representing a ground truth trajectory and ﬁnally, (v) We demonstrate
HeadHunter-T to be a strong baseline by comparing with three existing state-of-the-art trackers on CroHD. 2.