Abstract
These days, unsupervised super-resolution (SR) is soar-ing due to its practical and promising potential in real sce-narios. The philosophy of off-the-shelf approaches lies in the augmentation of unpaired data, i.e. ﬁrst generating syn-thetic low-resolution (LR) images Y g corresponding to real-world high-resolution (HR) images X r in the real-world LR domain Y r, and then utilizing the pseudo pairs {Y g, X r} for training in a supervised manner. Unfortunately, since image translation itself is an extremely challenging task, the SR performance of these approaches is severely lim-ited by the domain gap between generated synthetic LR images and real LR images.
In this paper, we propose a novel domain-distance aware super-resolution (DASR) ap-proach for unsupervised real-world image SR. The domain gap between training data (e.g. Y g) and testing data (e.g.
Y r) is addressed with our domain-gap aware training and domain-distance weighted supervision strategies. Domain-gap aware training takes additional beneﬁt from real data in the target domain while domain-distance weighted su-pervision brings forward the more rational use of labeled source domain data. The proposed method is validated on synthetic and real datasets and the experimental results show that DASR consistently outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised SR approaches in generating SR outputs with more realistic and natural textures. Codes are available at https://github.com/ShuhangGu/DASR. 1.

Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SR) aims at reconstruct-ing a high-resolution (HR) image from a low-resolution
In the past two decades, SR has been (LR) observation. a thriving research topic due to its highly practical value in enhancing image details and textures. A wide variety of models [15, 19, 55, 49, 22] have been suggested to deal with the image SR problem.
*The ﬁrst two authors contribute equally to this work.
†Corresponding author.
Bicubic
FSSR [16]
DASR(ours) Real-world
Figure 1: Visualization of the domain-gap between the gen-erated LR images by different methods and LR images in the AIM [40] dataset. More details can be found in our main text.
Beneﬁting from the rapid development of deep convolu-tional neural networks (CNNs), recent years have witnessed an explosive spread of training CNN models [27, 38, 48, 52, 60, 63, 57, 36] for SR. State-of-the-art SR performance has been boosted by directly training networks to capture the
LR-to-HR mapping. Moreover, when combined with adver-sarial training [20] or perceptual losses [31], SR networks can produce accurate and natural-looking image details.
In spite of their success on benchmark datasets, the poor generalization capacity of discriminatively trained SR net-works limits their application in real scenarios. When ap-plied to super-resolve real images, SR networks trained on simulated datasets usually lead to undesired strong artifacts in their SR results. For the pursuit of real image SR, great attempts have been made in the last couple of years. By ad-justing the focal length of a digital camera, several works prepared real image SR datasets [9, 61, 8]. But the col-lections of these datasets are often laborious and costly.
Furthermore, SR networks trained on the collected datasets are hard to generalize to images captured in other condi-13385
tions. Another category of approaches investigates real-world image SR from an algorithmic perspective. Some works [41, 64, 5, 30] assume the LR and HR images satisfy a parameterized degradation model and propose blind SR algorithms which are able to adapt to the unknown down-sampling kernel in the testing phase. These blind SR algo-rithms [11, 56, 58, 4] have shown improved generalization capacity over models trained on predetermined synthetic data, but the ﬁxed degradation assumption greatly limits their performances on real data, which are often subject to complex sensor noise and compression artifacts.
Recently, without any assumptions on the degradation model, unsupervised SR approaches have been proposed to leverage unpaired training data. Given a set of real-world
LR images Y r = {yr i }i=1,...,N , some works [7, 39, 16, 24] proposed to train a degradation network to generate LR ob-servations yg i ∈ X r, and i of the available HR images xr enforcing the same distribution of the generated LR images
Y g = {yg i }i=1,...,M with that of real LR images Y r. With the generated pseudo pairs {Y g, X r}, supervised training can be employed to train the SR network. Such unsuper-vised settings exploit the real training data to learn the com-plex degradation model and lead to promising SR results on real-world images [40]. However, existing unsupervised SR approaches [16, 7, 39] ignore the domain-gap between Y g and Y r in the training process of SR networks. In Fig. 1, we visualize the domain gap between the generated and the real LR images. We employed Bicubic downsampling, the trained down-sampling networks by FSSR [16] and our proposed DASR to generate LR images from HR images.
Although the trained down-sampling networks are able to generate better LR images that reside in a domain closer to the real LR domain than the bicubically downsampled im-ages, the domain gap still exists between Y g and Y r. The
Fr´echet Inception Distance (FID) [26] between bicubically downsampled images, FSSR generated LR images, DASR generated LR images and AIM LR images are 37.69, 33.89 and 31.28, respectively. As the four groups of LR images share the same image contents, the FID scores clearly re-ﬂect the domain-distance between generated LR images and real-world LR images in the AIM [40] dataset.
In this paper, we propose a Domain-distance Aware
Super-resolution (DASR) framework for real-world image super-resolution. Different from previous unsupervised methods [7, 39, 16, 23] which rely on the generation of pseudo pairs for supervised training, our DASR takes into consideration the domain gap between the generated and real LR images, i.e. Y g and Y r, and solves the SR prob-lem with both of them under a domain adaptation setting.
Our DASR method addresses the domain gap issue through two training strategies: domain-gap aware training and domain-distance weighted supervision. Firstly, with the domain-gap aware training, DASR employs both the gener-ated pseudo pairs {Y g, X r} and real LR images Y r to train the SR network. Besides the supervised loss on the pseudo pairs {Y g, X r}, DASR also imposes adversarial constraints on the HR estimation ˆX r→r of real-world data Y r. Incor-porating Y r into training informs the network of the target domain, greatly improves its SR performance on real-world data. Secondly, besides the domain-gap aware training, a domain-distance weighted supervision strategy is also pro-posed for advanced exploitation of the generated pseudo pairs. As shown in Fig. 1, some generated LR samples re-side closer to the real-world domain while the others are rel-atively far away from it. We therefore adjust the importance of each pair {yg i } according to the domain distance be-tween yg i and Y r. Samples that are relatively closer to the real-world domain are assigned with larger weights in the training phase; while unrealistic samples are only allowed to make a limited contribution to the training. i , xr
In addition to the above strategies, which are the major contributions of this paper, we also improve previous meth-ods by employing better architecture of the down-sampling network and better adversarial loss in the wavelet domain.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• A domain distance aware super-resolution (DASR) framework is proposed to solve the real-world image
SR problem. DASR addresses the domain gap between generated LR images and real images with the pro-posed domain-gap aware training and domain-distance weighted supervision strategies.
• We provide detailed ablation studies to analyze and validate our contributions. Experimental results on synthetic and real datasets clearly demonstrate the su-periority of DASR over the competing approaches. 2.