Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods for person re-identiﬁcation (re-ID) aim at transferring re-ID knowledge from labeled source data to unlabeled target data. Although achieving great success, most of them only use limited data from a single-source domain for model pre-training, making the rich labeled data insufﬁciently ex-ploited. To make full use of the valuable labeled data, we introduce the multi-source concept into UDA person re-ID
ﬁeld, where multiple source datasets are used during train-ing. However, because of domain gaps, simply combining different datasets only brings limited improvement. In this paper, we try to address this problem from two perspectives, i.e. domain-speciﬁc view and domain-fusion view. Two con-structive modules are proposed, and they are compatible with each other. First, a rectiﬁcation domain-speciﬁc batch normalization (RDSBN) module is explored to simultane-ously reduce domain-speciﬁc characteristics and increase the distinctiveness of person features. Second, a graph con-volutional network (GCN) based multi-domain information fusion (MDIF) module is developed, which minimizes do-main distances by fusing features of different domains. The proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art UDA person re-ID methods by a large margin, and even achieves com-parable performance to the supervised approaches with-out any post-processing techniques. 1.

Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation (re-ID) aims at retrieving images of a speciﬁed person across different cameras. Recently, supervised person re-ID methods [34, 37, 47] have made impressive progress. However, when testing on unseen datasets, they usually suffer from dramatic performance degradation. Collecting and annotating enough training
∗Co-Corresponding Auther. data for a speciﬁed scenario is expected, but it is labor-intensive and expensive. Therefore, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) for person re-ID has attracted an increas-ing attention.
Numerous UDA person re-ID methods have been pro-posed. Among them, the pseudo-label-based branch [33, 41, 10] dominates the state-of-the-art methods. They usu-ally consists of two steps: (1) obtaining a pre-trained model by supervised training on the source domain; (2) training on the target domain by pseudo-label prediction and ﬁne-tune iteratively. Although pseudo-label-based methods are proved effective, most of them only use limited data from a single-source domain for model pre-training, making the rich labeled data insufﬁciently exploited. This is undoubt-edly a great waste of resources.
To make full use of the existing abundant labeled data, we ﬁrst introduce the multi-source concept into UDA per-son re-ID ﬁeld, where multiple source datasets are used in both model pre-training and ﬁne-tuning stages. For the lat-ter, the ground-truth labels of source domain and pseudo la-bels of target domain together provide supervisions. How-ever, we ﬁnd simply combining different datasets brings limited improvement or even negative effect. This is be-cause different datasets usually have different characteris-tics such as color, illumination, camera views, etc. This problem is widely known as domain gaps.
In this paper, we try to address this problem from two perspectives, i.e. domain-speciﬁc view and domain-fusion view. As for the former, several successful UDA methods
[1, 45, 2] use speciﬁc network components to capture and eliminate incompatible characteristics of different domains.
Nevertheless, most of these methods are originally designed for a close-set problem, i.e. general classiﬁcation which has the following properties. (1) Multiple domains share all or part of the label set. (2) Samples have relatively small intra-class distances and large inter-class distances. Due to these two reasons, it is easy for these methods to correctly aggre-gate intra-class samples even they come from different do-12914
mains. On the contrary, person re-ID is a ﬁne-grained open-set problem where person images present subtle differences and identities/classes are completely disjoint. Directly ap-plying existing domain-speciﬁc methods to multi-domain person re-ID task may improperly aggregate identities from different domains. To tackle this problem, a rectiﬁcation domain-speciﬁc batch normalization (RDSBN) module is proposed in this paper. Inspired by [2], we use individual
BN branches to capture and reduce domain-speciﬁc infor-mation. Moreover, we exploit a rectiﬁcation procedure that adaptively tunes BN parameters for each instance to en-hance identity-related information and make features more discriminative.
As for the domain-fusion view, some works [21, 43, 22, 23] attempt to minimize domain distances by fusing feature distributions. Unfortunately, they also depend on the close-set setting. For re-ID problem, we develop a more ﬂexible
GCN-based multi-domain information fusion (MDIF) mod-ule to reduce domain distances. There are two main differ-ences between previous GCN-based re-ID methods and our
MDIF module. First, from motivation perspective, previous works [32, 14] leverage GCN to enhance feature represen-tation, while our MDIF module aims at reducing domain gaps. Second, from working mechanism perspective, previ-ous works mainly follow the formulation of ordinary GCN
[17]. While in MDIF module, a domain-agent-node con-cept is proposed which weighted combines features of the same domain as a global representation. Then, our MDIF module enables information to propagate among domain-agent-nodes and instances to conduct domain fusion. Dur-ing testing, domain-agent-nodes come from the recorded moving average values like BN, thus no extra computation is needed.
The contributions of this work can be summarized as three-fold. 1) We introduce the multi-source concept into
UDA person re-ID ﬁeld. To the best of our knowledge, this is a pioneering work to study the multi-source UDA problem in the person re-ID community. 2) We propose a rectiﬁcation domain-speciﬁc batch normalization (RDSBN) module which can simultaneously reduce domain-speciﬁc information and improve the distinctiveness of person fea-tures. 3) We develop a GCN based multi-domain informa-tion fusion (MDIF) module to pull different domains close in feature space, and shed new light on the effect of GCN on reducing domain gaps. 2.