Abstract texture rather than object shape.2
It is widely accepted that reasoning about object shape is important for object recognition. However, the most power-ful object recognition methods today do not explicitly make use of object shape during learning. In this work, motivated by recent developments in low-shot learning, ﬁndings in de-velopmental psychology, and the increased use of synthetic data in computer vision research, we investigate how rea-soning about 3D shape can be used to improve low-shot learning methods’ generalization performance. We pro-pose a new way to improve existing low-shot learning ap-proaches by learning a discriminative embedding space us-ing 3D object shape, and using this embedding by learning how to map images into it. Our new approach improves the performance of image-only low-shot learning approaches on multiple datasets. We also introduce Toys4K, a 3D object dataset with the largest number of object categories cur-rently available, which supports low-shot learning. 1 1.

Introduction
Understanding the role of 3D object shape in categoriz-ing objects from images is a classical topic in computer vision [29, 9, 51], and the early history of object recog-nition was dominated by considerations of object shape.
For example, David Marr’s inﬂuential theory [27] posits that image-based recognition should be formulated as a se-quence of information extraction steps culminating in a 3D representation to be used for recognition. The difﬁculty of reliably extracting 3D shape from images, combined with the availability of large-scale image datasets [6, 22], motivated the modern development of purely appearance-based approaches to recognition and categorization. This has culminated in current approaches such as CNNs that learn feature representations directly from images. More-over, a study by Geirhos et al. [14] of the inductive biases of CNNs trained on ImageNet suggests that categorization performance is driven primarily by a bias towards image
However, studies of infant learning [24, 7, 23, 15] sug-gest that shape does play a signiﬁcant role in the ability to rapidly learn object categories from a small number of examples, a task which is analogous to few-shot learning.
Both young children and adults who are forced to catego-rize novel objects based on a few examples display a shape bias, meaning that shape cues seem to play a dominant role in comparison to color and texture when inferring category membership. These studies beg the question of whether in-formation about 3D object shape could be useful in learn-ing to perform few-shot categorization from images. While prior work has demonstrated effective approaches to object categorization using 3D shapes as input [34, 36, 55, 56, 4], and there is a large literature on few-shot learning from im-ages alone [44, 53, 18, 38, 59, 49, 11], the question of how shape cues could be used to learn effective representations for image-based low-shot categorization has not been inves-tigated previously.
The goal of this paper is to explore the incorporation of a shape bias in SOTA approaches to few-shot object catego-rization and thereby investigate the utility of shape informa-tion in category learning. We leverage the recent availability of datasets of 3D object models with category labels, such as ModelNet40 [56] and ShapeNet [2]. By sampling surface point clouds and rendering images of these models, we can construct datasets that combine 3D shape and image cues.
Unfortunately, however, ShapeNet and ModelNet contain a relatively small number of object categories (55 and 40 re-spectively), making it difﬁcult to test categorization at a suf-ﬁcient scale. To resolve this limitation, we introduce a new 3D object dataset, Toys4K consisting of 4,179 3D objects from 105 object categories, designed to contain categories of objects that are commonly encountered by infants and children during their development.
We report on two sets of investigations. First, we ex-amine the relative effectiveness of purely image-based and purely shape-based approaches to few-shot categorization. 1The code and data for this paper are available at our project page https://rehg-lab.github.io/publication-pages/lowshot-shapebias/ 2This study does not speak to the possibility of whether shape could be used more effectively, and it is unclear how much of the bias stems from the composition of the ImageNet dataset itself. 1798
1. Learn a discriminative shape embedding space from point clouds on data from base classes 2. Extract object shape embeddings  with the trained point cloud encoder 3. Learn to map images into the shape space
Minimize the L2  distance between image and learned  shape embeddings 
Maintain pairwise  distances between  point cloud and  image embeddings shape embed. image embed.
Untrained image encoder randomly maps  images into the shape embedding space
Figure 1. To perform low-shot learning with shape-bias, we train a embedding space deﬁned by a point cloud encoder fp trained with cross-entropy. Shape based embedding spaces are more discriminative than image-based ones (see Tbl. 1). We extract object shape embeddings, and train an image encoder fi to map images into the shape space. If trained successfully, fi will have the discriminative properties of fp.
We demonstrate that purely shape-based few-shot learning outperforms image-based approaches, and establish an em-pirical upper bound on the effectiveness of a shape bias.
Second, we develop a novel approach for training an im-age embedding representation for low-shot categorization which incorporates an explicit shape bias, which we out-line in Figure 1. We benchmark this approach on a repre-sentative set of SOTA few-shot learning architectures and demonstrate that the incorporation of shape bias results in increased generalization accuracy over image-based train-ing alone. In summary, this paper makes the following con-tributions:
• A new approach to add explicit shape-bias to exist-ing low-shot image classiﬁcation methods, utilizing 3D object shape to learn similarity relationships be-tween objects, which leads to improved low-shot per-formance.
• The ﬁrst evidence that shape information can enable image-based low-shot classiﬁers to generalize with higher accuracy to novel object categories.
• Toys4K - new 3D object dataset containing approxi-mately twice the number of object categories as previ-ous datasets which can be used for low-shot learning. 2.