Abstract
Pedestrian detection in a crowd is a challenging task due to a high number of mutually-occluding human in-stances, which brings ambiguity and optimization difﬁcul-ties to the current IoU-based ground truth assignment pro-In this pa-cedure in classical object detection methods. per, we develop a unique perspective of pedestrian detec-tion as a variational inference problem. We formulate a novel and efﬁcient algorithm for pedestrian detection by modeling the dense proposals as a latent variable while proposing a customized Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes (AEVB) algorithm. Through the optimization of our pro-posed algorithm, a classical detector can be fashioned into a variational pedestrian detector. Experiments conducted on CrowdHuman and CityPersons datasets show that the proposed algorithm serves as an efﬁcient solution to han-dle the dense pedestrian detection problem for the case of single-stage detectors. Our method can also be ﬂexibly ap-plied to two-stage detectors, achieving notable performance enhancement. 1.

Introduction
Pedestrian detection in a crowd, as a speciﬁc branch of object detection, has been widely studied in recent years
[26, 4, 5, 39, 44, 21, 6, 36] due to massive applications.
However, heavy occlusion and high overlap among human instances make extracting instance-wise object bounding boxes a challenging task for pedestrian detectors.
A lot of deep learning based object detectors have been proposed in the past few years in this ﬁeld, and they are typically categorized into two-stage detectors and single-stage detectors. Single-stage methods show fantastic efﬁ-ciency and performance for general-purpose object detec-tion. These detectors, in brief, operates as follows: an im-age f is ﬁrst passed through a fully convolutional network to predict a set of dense proposals z. A post-processing step, which typically includes a non-maximum suppression (NMS) and a score threshold, is then applied to predict the
*Equally-contributed ﬁrst authors
†Corresponding author, Email:wylin@sjtu.edu.cn f z x pθ gt f z x pθ gt f z qφ p e x (a) Ofﬂine. (b) Online. (c) Ours.
Image
Dense Proposals
Final Boxes qφ p e f z x (d) The three variables in single-stage object detection.
Figure 1: Graph illustration of relation modeling in single-stage object detection. Object detectors optimized by: (a) ofﬂine ground truth assignment [22, 27, 19, 35]; (b) online ground truth assignment [45, 25]; (c) Variational
Pedestrian detector. Dashed line denote variational models; the variable of interest is marked gray.
ﬁnal detection results x.
Single-stage object detectors are usually trained over an
IoU related loss between pre-deﬁned dense boxes (namely anchors) z and ground truth boxes. We deﬁne this learning ofﬂine as shown in Figure 1a; the method ﬁrst assigns the ground truth to anchors and then adjusts the anchor boxes through regression. This may be ambiguous in crowded scenes whereby a single anchor usually highly overlaps with multiple object instances [1]. Thus, this could yield a sub-optimal solution and greatly hinders the performance. To handle this issue, a series of methods [45, 25] have been proposed to adjust the object proposal before, or even si-multaneously with the assignment procedure. We call this kind of learning as online, as illustrated in Figure 1b. How-ever, online pipelines still conform to a certain handcrafted 11622
matching rules and result in less sufﬁcient exploration of matching space between proposals and groundtruth.
Different from online and ofﬂine methods where the dense proposal z is considered as part of the optimization target, we here formulate the dense proposal z as an aux-iliary latent variable which relates to the ﬁnal detection x as our target (as illustrated in Figure 1c and Figure 1d). To be speciﬁc, we introduce a random learning-to-match ap-proach via variational inference, which predicts the distri-bution of dense proposals z instead of deterministic value.
Such variational pedestrian detector can learn to adaptively adjust the exploration strategy in matching space by itself, thus can handle heavy occlusion for pedestrian detection when only training with full body information. Another im-portant property is the plug-and-play nature which makes our method cater to both anchor-based and anchor-free de-tection pipelines.
The major contributions in this paper are three-fold:
• We propose a a brand new perspective of formulating single-stage detectors as a variational inference prob-lem and intend to motivate further extensions of detec-tion schemes along this direction.
• We introduce a detection-customized Auto-Encoding
Variational Bayes (AEVB) algorithm motivated by
[16] to optimize the general object detectors for pedes-trian detection.
• Our experiments on CrowdHuman [32] and CityPer-sons [41, 7] datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach for single-stage and two-stage detectors. 2.