Abstract
In this paper, we propose a two-stage deep learning framework called VoxelContext-Net for both static and dy-namic point cloud compression. Taking advantages of both octree based methods and voxel based schemes, our ap-proach employs the voxel context to compress the octree structured data. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst extract the local voxel representation that encodes the spatial neighbouring con-text information for each node in the constructed octree.
Then, in the entropy coding stage, we propose a voxel con-text based deep entropy model to compress the symbols of non-leaf nodes in a lossless way. Furthermore, for dynamic point cloud compression, we additionally introduce the lo-cal voxel representations from the temporal neighbouring point clouds to exploit temporal dependency. More impor-tantly, to alleviate the distortion from the octree construc-tion procedure, we propose a voxel context based 3D co-ordinate reﬁnement method to produce more accurate re-constructed point cloud at the decoder side, which is appli-cable to both static and dynamic point cloud compression.
The comprehensive experiments on both static and dynamic point cloud benchmark datasets(e.g., ScanNet and Semantic
KITTI) clearly demonstrate the effectiveness of our newly proposed method VoxelContext-Net for 3D point cloud ge-ometry compression. 1.

Introduction
Due to the rapid population of 3D sensors such as Li-DAR, there is an increasing research interest to compress tremendous amount of 3D point cloud data for a broad range of applications (e.g., autonomous driving). When compared with image and video compression [35, 32, 4, 37, 31, 19], it is a more challenging task to compress a set of orderless 3D points from point clouds.
Recently, several deep learning methods were devel-oped for point cloud compression. For example, Wang et al. [36] transformed the point cloud data to the voxel representation in order to capture the spatial dependency,
*Guo Lu is the corresponding author.
... ancestor nodes
...
Tree-node 
Context
Tree-node
Context
...
...
Entropy 
Model
Distribution
Distribution
Entropy 
Model neighbouring nodes
...
Voxel Context (a) (b)
Figure 1. Comparison between two context generation approaches for learning the entropy model based on the octree structured data. (a) Tree-node context used in [15]. (b) Local voxel context em-ployed in our approach. and then they employed the existing image compression method [2] for point cloud compression. Other recent works [39] and [16] directly compressed the raw point cloud data by using the existing backbone networks (e.g.,
PointNet/PointNet++ [25, 26]) for feature encoding. These voxel-based or point-based methods can take advantage of the existing image compression or point cloud analysis techniques. However, the voxel-based methods ignore the sparsity characteristic of point clouds and thus suffer from the relatively high computational complexity [36] while the point based methods are inefﬁcient when processing large point cloud data [39]. In [15], Huang et al. used the oc-tree to organize the point cloud data and proposed an en-tropy model to exploit the dependency between multiple parent nodes and each child node (see Figure 1(a)). Al-though their approach inherits the beneﬁts for efﬁciently processing octree structured point cloud data, the strong de-pendency among the neighboring octree nodes at the same depth level is unfortunately ignored in their octree-based entropy model [15]. Furthermore, the distortions are also introduced after converting the raw point cloud to the oc-tree structured data, which further degrades the compres-sion performance. Besides, their approach is only designed for static point cloud compression, which may limit the per-formance for dynamic point cloud compression.
To address these issues, we propose a new learning based point cloud compression method VoxelContext-Net by ex-ploiting the voxel context in the octree based framework.
Our approach takes advantage of the efﬁcient data organi-zation ability from the octree based methods and the spatial modeling capability from the voxel based methods, which 6042
can be applied to both static and dynamic point cloud ge-ometry compression. Speciﬁcally, the input point cloud is
ﬁrst organized by using the octree structure, where the sym-bol of each non-leaf node represents the occupancy status of its eight children. In the entropy coding stage, we pro-pose a new learning based entropy model to compress these symbols in a lossless way. To effectively produce context information for the entropy model, we exploit the local bi-nary voxel representation for each node, where the entries of our voxel representation indicate the existence of neigh-bouring nodes at the same depth level (see Figure 1(b)).
Furthermore, to reduce temporal redundancy for dynamic point cloud compression, we additionally include the co-located voxel representations from the previous and the sub-sequent point clouds to generate richer context information.
In the reconstruction stage, we further propose a coordinate reﬁnement method based on the local voxel representations at the decoder side to produce more accurate 3D coordinate for each leaf node in both static and dynamic point clouds.
We evaluate the performance of our newly proposed method on the large-scale 3D static and dynamic point cloud datasets (e.g., ScanNet [7] and Semantic KITTI [11, 3]). The comprehensive experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms both hand-crafted point cloud com-pression methods and the learning-based point cloud com-pression methods.
The contributions of our work are highlighted as follows:
• By taking the advantage of both voxel based methods and octree based schemes, we introduce local voxel context in the deep entropy model for better compres-sion of octree structured data. Our approach can be applied to both static and dynamic point cloud com-pression.
• We develop a voxel context based coordinate reﬁne-ment module to produce accurate coordinates of leaf nodes at the decoder side.
• Our simple and effective approach achieves the state-of-the-art compression performance on several large-scale datasets for both static and dynamic point cloud geometry compression. 2.