Abstract
A common strategy for improving model robustness is through data augmentations. Data augmentations encour-age models to learn desired invariances, such as invariance to horizontal ﬂipping or small changes in color. Recent work has shown that arbitrary style transfer can be used as a form of data augmentation to encourage invariance to textures by creating painting-like images from photographs. However, a stylized photograph is not quite the same as an artist-created painting. Artists depict perceptually meaningful cues in paintings so that humans can recognize salient components in scenes, an emphasis which is not enforced in style transfer.
Therefore, we study how style transfer and paintings differ in their impact on model robustness. First, we investigate the role of paintings as style images for stylization-based data augmentation. We ﬁnd that style transfer functions well even without paintings as style images. Second, we show that learning from paintings as a form of perceptual data augmentation can improve model robustness. Finally, we investigate the invariances learned from stylization and from paintings, and show that models learn different invariances from these differing forms of data. Our results provide in-sights into how stylization improves model robustness, and provide evidence that artist-created paintings can be a valu-able source of data for model robustness. Code and data are available at: https://github.com/hubertsgithub/ style_painting_robustness 1.

Introduction
Model robustness can be deﬁned as the capability of a model to generalize to unseen image distributions. These can be the result of real-world effects, like weather and camera noise [13], adversarial noise [23], or distribution shifts due to differences in environments in which the images are captured.
The performance of standard recognition models can degrade drastically in these settings, but robust models are critical for applications such as self-driving or medical diagnostics.
A common strategy is to improve generalization through data augmentation [45, 8, 14, 23]. Conventional data aug-mentation applies transformations to encourage invariance to heuristic rules (e.g., ﬂipping for invariance to image mir-roring). Recent work has found that image stylization can encourage models to learn invariance to texture [10]. While style transfer has focused on visual ﬁdelity [17], we argue that current style transfer models do not yet fully capture the essence of artistic paintings. For example, a family of style transfer algorithms act by manipulating feature distri-butions to create a stylized photo which holistically mimics a painting [22] – in effect, mid-level textures are manipu-lated in the stylized photo. However, paintings are more than a style ﬁlter applied to a photo. An artist can choose lighting, contours, and scene context to convey realism in important scene regions while foregoing perceptual details less important areas. This artistic manipulation can affect our perceptual understanding of the scene.
In this paper, we explore a series of hypotheses to un-derstand how style transfer and paintings impact model ro-bustness. Fig. 1 illustrates that various types of images can differently affect model robustness. First, we examine how style images play a role in stylization-based data augmenta-tion in Section 4. Second, we investigate the role of paintings as a form of training data, and contrast it to other artforms such as sketches in Section 5. Finally, we probe models to empirically understand their learned invariances, and discuss how style transfer and artistic paintings can contribute to robust natural image recognition models in Section 6. Our contributions are:
• We demonstrate that arbitrary style transfer can be used as effective data augmentation even without painting style images. We attribute their effectiveness to the diversity of style images rather than artistic style.
• We argue that paintings can be considered a form of perceptual data augmentation, and demonstrate that it can improve model robustness. We contrast paintings with other forms of art such as sketches.
• We explore the invariances learned from arbitrary style transfer, learned artistic style transfer, and paintings.
We ﬁnd that models do not learn the same invariances from stylized photos and paintings, and show that the learned invariances are complementary. 2.