Abstract
The ever-growing amounts of visual contents captured on a daily basis necessitate the use of lossy compression methods in order to save storage space and transmission bandwidth. While extensive research efforts are devoted to improving compression techniques, every method inevitably discards information. Especially at low bit rates, this in-formation often corresponds to semantically meaningful vi-sual cues, so that decompression involves signiﬁcant am-biguity. In spite of this fact, existing decompression algo-rithms typically produce only a single output, and do not allow the viewer to explore the set of images that map to the given compressed code. In this work we propose the ﬁrst image decompression method to facilitate user-exploration of the diverse set of natural images that could have given rise to the compressed input code, thus granting users the ability to determine what could and what could not have been there in the original scene. Speciﬁcally, we develop a novel deep-network based decoder architecture for the ubiquitous JPEG standard, which allows traversing the set of decompressed images that are consistent with the com-pressed JPEG ﬁle. To allow for simple user interaction, we develop a graphical user interface comprising several intuitive exploration tools, including an automatic tool for examining speciﬁc solutions of interest. We exemplify our framework on graphical, medical and forensic use cases, demonstrating its wide range of potential applications. 1.

Introduction
With surveillance systems so widely used and social net-works ever more popular, the constant growth in the capac-ity of daily captured visual data necessitates using lossy compression algorithms (e.g. JPEG, H.264), that discard part of the recorded information in order to reduce stor-age space and transmission bandwidth. Over the years, extensive research has been devoted to improving com-pression techniques, whether by designing better decoders for existing encoders, or by devising new compression-decompression (CODEC) pairs, that enable higher percep-tual quality even at low bit-rates. However, in any lossy compression method, the decoder faces inevitable ambigu-ity. This ambiguity is particularly severe at low bit-rates, which are becoming more prevalent with the ability to main-tain perceptual quality at extreme compression ratios [1].
This is exempliﬁed in Fig. 1 in the context of the JPEG stan-dard. Low bit-rate compression may prevent the discrimina-tion between different animals, or the correct identiﬁcation of a shirt pattern, a barcode, or text. Yet, despite this in-herent ambiguity, existing decoders do not allow the user to explore the abundance of plausible images that could have been the source of a given compressed code.
Recently, there has been growing research focus on mod-els that can produce diverse outputs for any given input, for image synthesis [2, 3, 4], as well as for image restoration tasks, e.g. denoising [5], compression artifact reduction [6] and super-resolution [7, 8, 9]. The latter group of works took another step, and also allowed users to interactively traverse the space of high-resolution images that correspond to a given low-resolution input. In this paper, we propose the ﬁrst method to allow users to explore the space of natural images that corresponds to a compressed image code. We speciﬁcally focus on the ubiquitous JPEG standard, though our approach can be readily extended to other image and video compression formats.
A key component of our method is a novel JPEG de-compression network architecture, which predicts the quan-tization errors of the DCT coefﬁcients and is thus guaran-teed to produce outputs that are consistent with the com-pressed code. This property is crucial for enabling reliable exploration and examining what could and what could not have been present in the underlying scene. Our scheme has a control input signal that can be used to manipulate the output. This, together with adversarial training, allows our decoder to generate diverse photo-realistic outputs for any given compressed input code.
We couple our network with a graphical user interface (GUI), which lets the user interactively explore the space of 2908
Figure 1. Ambiguity in JPEG decompression. A compressed JPEG ﬁle can correspond to numerous different plausibly looking images.
These can vary in color, texture, and other structures that encode important semantic information. Since multiple images map to the same
JPEG code, any decoder that outputs only a single reconstruction, fails to convey to the viewer the ambiguity regarding the encoded image.
Figure 2. Automatic exploration. Upon marking an ambiguous character in the image, our GUI harnesses a pre-trained digit classiﬁer to propose optional (consistent) reconstructions corresponding to the possible digits 0 − 9 (see details in Sec. 5). This feature is valuable in many use cases (e.g. forensic), as it can assist in both revealing and resolving decompression ambiguities; although pre-exploration decoding of the hour digit (yellow rectangle) by all methods (top row) may suggest it is 7, our automatic exploration tool produces perceptually plausible decodings as both 7 and 2 (green rectangles), thus uncovering the hidden ambiguity and even preventing false identiﬁcation, as the correct hour digit (in the pre-compressed image, bottom left) was indeed 2. consistent and perceptually plausible reconstructions. The user can attempt to enforce contents in certain regions of the decompressed image using various tools (see e.g. Fig. 3).
Those trigger an optimization problem that determines the control signal best satisfying the user’s constraints. Particu-larly, our work is the ﬁrst to facilitate automatic user explo-ration, by harnessing pre-trained designated classiﬁers, e.g. to assess which digits are likely to correspond to a com-pressed image of a digital clock (see Fig. 2).
Our explorable JPEG decoding approach is of wide ap-plicability. Potential use cases range from allowing a user to restore lost information based on prior knowledge they may have about the captured image, through correcting unsat-isfying decompression outputs (demonstrated in Fig. 8), to situations where a user wants to test speciﬁc hypotheses re-garding the original image. The latter setting is particularly important in forensic image analysis and in medical image analysis, as exempliﬁed in Figs. 2 and 4, respectively. 2.