Abstract
Whether what you see in Figure 1 is a “ﬂamingo” or a
“bird”, is the question we ask in this paper. While ﬁne-grained visual classiﬁcation (FGVC) strives to arrive at the former, for the majority of us non-experts just “bird” would probably sufﬁce. The real question is therefore – how can we tailor for different ﬁne-grained deﬁnitions un-der divergent levels of expertise. For that, we re-envisage the traditional setting of FGVC, from single-label clas-siﬁcation, to that of top-down traversal of a pre-deﬁned coarse-to-ﬁne label hierarchy – so that our answer becomes
“bird” ⇒ “Phoenicopteriformes” ⇒ “Phoenicopteridae”
⇒ “ﬂamingo”.
To approach this new problem, we ﬁrst conduct a com-prehensive human study where we conﬁrm that most partic-ipants prefer multi-granularity labels, regardless whether they consider themselves experts. We then discover the key intuition that: coarse-level label prediction exacerbates
ﬁne-grained feature learning, yet ﬁne-level feature betters the learning of coarse-level classiﬁer. This discovery en-ables us to design a very simple albeit surprisingly effective solution to our new problem, where we (i) leverage level-speciﬁc classiﬁcation heads to disentangle coarse-level fea-tures with ﬁne-grained ones, and (ii) allow ﬁner-grained features to participate in coarser-grained label predictions, which in turn helps with better disentanglement. Experi-ments show that our method achieves superior performance in the new FGVC setting, and performs better than state-of-the-art on the traditional single-label FGVC problem as well. Thanks to its simplicity, our method can be easily im-plemented on top of any existing FGVC frameworks and is parameter-free. 1.

Introduction
Fine-grained visual classiﬁcation (FGVC) was ﬁrst in-troduced to the vision community almost two decades ago
*indicates corresponding author.
Figure 1: Deﬁnition of what is ﬁne-grained is subjective.
Your “ﬂamingo” is my “bird”. with the landmark paper of [2].
It brought out a critical question that was largely overlooked back then – that can machines match up to humans on recognising objects at
ﬁne-grained level (e.g., a “ﬂamingo” other than a “bird”).
Great strides have been made over the years, starting with the conventional part-based models [51, 14, 1, 3], to the re-cent surge of deep models that either explicitly or implic-itly tackle part learning with or without strong supervision
[26, 34, 52, 55, 57, 48]. Without exception, the focus has been on mining ﬁne-grained discriminative features to bet-ter classiﬁcation performances.
In this paper, we too are interested in the ﬁne-grained rationale at large – yet we do not set out to pursue per-formance gains, we instead question the very deﬁnition
In particular, we ask of ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation itself. whether the ﬁne-grained expert labels commonplace to cur-rent FGVC datasets indeed convey what end users are ac-customed to – i.e., are the “Florida scrub jay”, “Fisker
Karma Sedan 2012”, “Boeing 737-200” are indeed the de-sired, or would “bird”, “car”, “aircraft” sufﬁce for many – my “ﬂamingo” can be just your “bird”. The answer is of course subjective [31], and largely correlates with expert knowledge – the more you are a bird lover, the more ﬁne-grained labels you desire, some might even look for “Amer-ican ﬂamingo” other than just “ﬂamingo”. The follow-up question is therefore, how can we tailor for the various sub-11476
jective deﬁnitions of what is ﬁne-grained, and design a sys-tem that best accommodates practical usage scenarios of
FGVC.
To answer this, we ﬁrst conduct a human study on the popular CUB-200-2011 bird dataset [42] with two questions in mind (i) how useful are the pre-deﬁned ﬁne-grained la-bels to a general user, and (ii) whether a single label output is in fact a preferred solution. We ﬁrst build a hierarchical taxonomy of bird, by tracing existing ﬁne-grained labels in
CUB-200-2011 to its parent sub-category, all the way to the super node of “bird” using Wikipedia. We then recruited 50 participants with various background of bird knowledge, each of whom rated 100 bird photos by (i) picking a la-bel amongst ﬁne- and coarse-grained ones relating to the bird, and (ii) indicating whether more label choices are de-sirable other than just the single label previously selected.
We ﬁnd that (i) participants do not necessarily choose the pre-deﬁned ﬁne-grained (bottom) labels as their preferred choice, (ii) only 36.4% of all returned choices prefer just a single label, and (iii) although domain experts tend to choose ﬁner-grained labels while amateurs prefer coarser ones, close to 80% of choices from experts also turn to the option of multi-granularity labels.
Following results from the human study, we propose to re-instantiate the FGVC problem by extending it from a single-label classiﬁcation problem, to that of multiple la-bel predictions on a pre-deﬁned label hierarchy. The central idea is while people tend to feel bafﬂed facing a single ex-pert label, a chain of coarse-to-ﬁne labels that describe an object can potentially be more practical – we leave it to the users to decide which ﬁne-grained level along the hierar-chy best suits their needs. Compared with a single label telling you it is a “ﬂamingo” (as per conventional FGVC), our model offers a coarse-to-ﬁne series of labels such as
“bird” ⇒ “Phoenicopteriformes” ⇒ “Phoenicopteridae” ⇒
“ﬂamingo” (See Figure 1).
On the outset, classifying an image into multiple cross-granularity labels seems an easy enough extension to the well-studied problem of FGVC with single-label output.
One can simply train a single model for classifying all nodes in the hierarchy, or better yet use separate classiﬁers for each hierarchy level. Although these do work as baselines, they do not beneﬁt from the inherent coarse-ﬁne hierarchi-cal relationship amongst labels – we show exploring these relationships not only helps to solve for the new FGVC set-ting, but also in turn beneﬁts the learning of ﬁne-grained features which then helps the conventional task.
Our design is based on the discovery of two key obser-vations on the label hierarchy: (i) coarse-level features in fact exacerbates the learning of ﬁne-grained features, and (ii) ﬁner-grained label learning can be exploited to enhance the discriminability of coarser-grained label classiﬁer. Our
ﬁrst technical contribution is therefore a multi-task learn-ing framework to perform level-wise feature disentangle-ment, with the aim to separate the adverse effect of coarse feature from ﬁne-grained ones. To further encourage the disentanglement, we then resort to the clever use of gra-dients to reﬂect our second observation. Speciﬁcally, dur-ing the forward pass only, we ask ﬁner-grained features to participate in the classiﬁcation of coarser-grained labels via feature concatenation. We, however, constrain the gradi-ent ﬂow to only update the parameters within each multi-task head. Our method is generic to any existing FGVC works and experiments show that it yields stronger classi-ﬁers across all granularities. Interestingly, our model also delivers state-of-the-art result when evaluated on the tradi-tional FGVC setting, while not introducing any additional parameters.
Our contributions are as follows: (i) we re-envisage the problem setting of FGVC, to accommodate the various sub-jective deﬁnitions of “ﬁne-grained”, where we advocate for top-bottom traversal of a coarse-to-ﬁne label hierarchy, other than the traditional single-label classiﬁcation; (ii) we discover important insights on the inherent coarse-ﬁne hi-erarchical relationship to drive our model design, and (iii) we show by disentangling coarse-level feature learning with that of ﬁne-grained, state-of-the-art performances can be achieved both on our new problem, and on the traditional problem of FGVC. 2.