Abstract
Real-world image degradation due to light scattering can be described based on the Koschmieder’s model. Train-ing deep models to restore such degraded images is chal-lenging as real-world paired data is scarcely available and synthetic paired data may suffer from domain-shift is-sues.
In this paper, a zero-shot single real-world image restoration model is proposed leveraging a theoretically de-duced property of degradation through the Koschmieder’s model. Our zero-shot network estimates the parameters of the Koschmieder’s model, which describes the degradation in the input image, to perform image restoration. We show that a suitable degradation of the input image amounts to a controlled perturbation of the Koschmieder’s model that de-scribes the image’s formation. The optimization of the zero-shot network is achieved by seeking to maintain the relation between its estimates of Koschmieder’s model parameters before and after the controlled perturbation, along with the use of a few no-reference losses. Image dehazing and un-derwater image restoration are carried out using the pro-posed zero-shot framework, which in general outperforms the state-of-the-art quantitatively and subjectively on mul-tiple standard real-world image datasets. Additionally, the application of our zero-shot framework for low-light image enhancement is also demonstrated. 1.

Introduction
Due to the scattering of light in adverse environmen-tal conditions, captured images suffer from poor visibil-ity [48, 34]. Such conditions are often encountered dur-ing imaging in hazy and underwater environments. Due to the presence of suspended particles like dust, aerosol, and water droplets in air, light gets absorbed to produce hazy images having reduced visibility and contrast [38].
The presence of color particles renders a hazy image to
∗Aupendu Kar and Sobhan Kanti Dhara share equal contribution
Webpage and Code: aupendu.github.io/zero-restore
Correspondence to: {mailtoaupendu, dhara.sk}@gmail.com be a color cast one as well [32, 14, 31]. Due to absorp-tion of light in turbid water medium, and attenuation of light depending on optical wavelengths and water salin-ity, underwater images suffer from poor visibility and color cast [46]. The well-accepted Koschmieder’s light scattering model [34, 48] with the transmission map and atmospheric light parameters describes such degradations in hazy im-ages. A modiﬁed version of the model [30] does so for the underwater images, where the atmospheric light is replaced by the global background light and the transmission map is modiﬁed into a channel-wise component. The said degra-dations in the images lead to poor performance in computer vision applications such as surveillance and robotic naviga-tion [37, 27, 29].
A plethora of techniques have been proposed for image dehazing [26, 10, 36, 52, 47, 51, 32, 15, 37, 22] and under-water image restoration [9, 50, 63, 12, 3, 42, 5, 2, 61, 39, 19, 58] to restore the images degraded due to haze and turbid medium, respectively. Most of the approaches either pro-vide hand-crafted prior or deep learning based solutions for the restoration. Most of the deep learning based techniques rely on synthetically generated degradation for training due to lack of large-scale datasets of real-world degraded im-ages with ground truth [36]. Such a training may not cap-ture the features of the real-world degradation, and hence, suffer from domain-shift issues [36]. A few deep learning based solutions are unsupervised approaches which either use hand-crafted priors for restoration [22] or use genera-tive adversarial networks (GAN) [52].
A zero-shot approach learns the task at hand from the in-put image alone, and therefore, is helpful in scenarios where real-world paired data for training is limited and its cre-ation is labor-intensive [35, 57, 53, 36]. Hence, a few zero-shot approaches have been proposed for the said restora-tion based on the Koschmieder’s model. However, as these zero-shot approaches do not have any other reference than the input image itself, they are required to estimate the pa-rameters of the Koschmieder’s model using loss functions or regularizers based on classical hand-crafted priors. For example, the zero-shot image dehazing approaches Double-DIP [21] and ZID [36] use the dark channel prior DCP [26] 16205
to train their transmission map estimator and consider the atmospheric light estimated by [8]. As such zero-shot ap-proaches depend on the use of hand-crafted priors to derive a result relevant to the problem at hand, they carry a risk of obtaining an output dominated by the characteristics of the prior.
This paper proposes a zero-shot single real-world im-age restoration approach that does not employ any hand-crafted prior for optimization. Our approach is based on the Koschmieder’s light scattering model and is free to con-verge at a solution without any prior bias. To this end, we theoretically show that a suitable degradation of the input image amounts to a controlled perturbation of the
Koschmeider’s model parameters that deﬁne the relation between the input image and the original uncorrupted im-age.
Invoking the above ﬁnding, an image-speciﬁc net-work model is designed to estimate the parameters of the
Koschmeider’s model, which are then used for the image restoration. The zero-shot learning of the network model is achieved through an optimization targeted to maintain the relation, given by the perturbation, between the two pairs of
Koschmeider’s model parameters estimated from the input image and its degraded form.
Our zero-shot approach can be used for the restoration of real-world images where the degradation is due to the scattering of light, and hence, can be formulated through the Koshmieder’s model. Using the proposed approach, we restore images captured in hazy conditions and turbid un-derwater medium, which suffer from such degradations. In the zero-shot optimization, a few generic no-reference loss functions are also employed that are designed for color cast reduction and to avoid pixel value saturation. Subjective and quantitative evaluations on multiple standard real-world image datasets show that our approach mostly outperforms the state-of-the-art of the respective domains.
To highlight, our work contributes in the following ways:
• To the best of our knowledge, the proposed approach is the ﬁrst that can be used for image restoration in all the application domains where the degradations can be formulated based on the Koschmieder’s model.
• To the best of our knowledge, the proposed zero-shot learning approach for dehazing and underwater image restoration is ﬁrst of a kind, where a prior based loss function or regularizer is not required. Further, our ap-proach is probably the ﬁrst zero-shot approach for un-derwater image restoration.
• Despite being a zero-shot approach, our approach out-performs or performs as good as the state-of-the-art in real-world image dehazing and underwater image restoration. We further demonstrate the use of our ap-proach for low-light image enhancement, where the
Koschmieder’s model can be employed [68]. 2.