Abstract
We present Zillow Indoor Dataset (ZInD): A large in-door dataset with 71,474 panoramas from 1,524 real unfur-nished homes. ZInD provides annotations of 3D room lay-outs, 2D and 3D ﬂoor plans, panorama location in the ﬂoor plan, and locations of windows and doors. The ground truth construction took over 1,500 hours of annotation work. To the best of our knowledge, ZInD is the largest real dataset with layout annotations. A unique property is the room lay-out data, which follows a real world distribution (cuboid, more general Manhattan, and non-Manhattan layouts) as opposed to the mostly cuboid or Manhattan layouts in cur-rent publicly available datasets. Also, the scale and annota-tions provided are valuable for effective research related to room layout and ﬂoor plan analysis. To demonstrate ZInD’s beneﬁts, we benchmark on room layout estimation from sin-gle panoramas and multi-view registration. 1.

Introduction
In computer vision, 3D scene understanding from 2D images has received considerable attention due to its crit-ical role in research areas such as robotics and mixed real-ity. Work has been done on automatic room layout estima-tion from single 360o panoramas [52, 56, 50, 42, 56, 32], which typically depend on either a relatively small set of real images, e.g., 2,295 RGB-D panoramic images in Mat-terportLayout [56], or the use of synthetic data due to the scale needed for training, e.g., around 196k images in Struc-ture3D [54]. Also, there are techniques for reconstructing
ﬂoor plans from a sequence of such panoramas ([6, 34]), or
In regards to real estate, approaches
RGB-D video [26]. on ﬂoor plan generation from user-speciﬁed constraints
[45, 16, 30] make use of architectural ﬂoor plan datasets.
We believe there is a need for more properly annotated data of indoor layouts and complete ﬂoor plans.
Many real and synthetic datasets have been released.
Current real datasets [52, 56] are limited both in size and variation due to challenges in capturing and annotating in-door spaces, both of which require non-trivial logistics, re-sources and privacy concerns. Synthetic datasets [54, 22] address the scale issue, but introduce a domain gap, which complicates generalization to real scenes.
In this paper, we introduce Zillow Indoor Dataset (ZInD)1, a dataset containing large numbers of annotated 360o panoramas, room layouts, and ﬂoor plans of real un-furnished residential homes2. For each panorama, its loca-tion within the ﬂoor plan and its associated 3D room layout are given (Figure 1). Also, locations of windows and doors are provided.
ZInD contains 1,524 homes, with a total of 71,474 panoramas, 21,596 room layouts, and 2,564 ﬂoor plans. We believe our dataset can facilitate research on room layout estimation, ﬂoor plan reconstruction from multiple panora-mas, and ﬂoor plan analysis that include image features (e.g., scene graphs). To showcase ZInD’s attributes, we ran experiments with state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods for room layout estimation and multi-view registration. 2.