Few-shot semantic segmentation (FSS) is an important task for novel (unseen) object segmentation under the data-scarcity scenario. However, most FSS methods rely on uni-directional feature aggregation, e.g., from support proto-types to get the query prediction, and from high-resolution features to guide the low-resolution ones. This usually fails to fully capture the cross-resolution feature relationships and thus leads to inaccurate estimates of the query objects.To resolve the above dilemma, we propose a cyclic memory network (CMN) to directly learn to read abundant support information from all resolution features in a cyclic manner.Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst generate N pairs (key and value) of multi-resolution query features guided by the support fea-ture and its mask. Next, we circularly take one pair of these features as the query to be segmented, and the rest N-1 pairs are written into an external memory accordingly, i.e., this leave-one-out process is conducted for N times. In each cy-cle, the query feature is updated by collaboratively match-ing its key and value with the memory, which can elegantly cover all the spatial locations from different resolutions.Furthermore, we incorporate the query feature re-adding and the query feature recursive updating mechanisms into the memory reading operation. CMN, equipped with these merits, can thus capture cross-resolution relationships and better handle the object appearance and scale variations inFSS. Experiments on PASCAL-5i and COCO-20i well vali-date the effectiveness of our model for FSS.Figure 1. Illustrations of existing FSS models and our CMN. (a) Existing FSS methods usually rely on unidirectional feature aggregation, e.g., utilizing the support prototypes to get the query prediction or leveraging the high-resolution features to guide the low-resolution ones. However, some car regions are wrongly pre-dicted as airplane, which is due to the large object variations in the support and query images (the airplanes have different scales and appearance colors). In this case, these unidirectional methods fail to capture and overcome the object variations. (b) CMN predicts the airplane in the query image pretty well, which beneﬁts from our cyclic memory reading on the multi-resolution features. 