Geometry Projection is a powerful depth estimation method in monocular 3D object detection.It estimates depth dependent on heights, which introduces mathemati-cal priors into the deep model. But projection process also introduces the error amplification problem, in which the er-ror of the estimated height will be amplified and reflected greatly at the output depth. This property leads to uncon-trollable depth inferences and also damages the training ef-ficiency. In this paper, we propose a Geometry UncertaintyProjection Network (GUP Net) to tackle the error amplifica-tion problem at both inference and training stages. Specif-ically, a GUP module is proposed to obtains the geometry-guided uncertainty of the inferred depth, which not only provides high reliable confidence for each depth but also benefits depth learning. Furthermore, at the training stage, we propose a Hierarchical Task Learning strategy to reduce the instability caused by error amplification. This learning algorithm monitors the learning situation of each task by a proposed indicator and adaptively assigns the proper loss weights for different tasks according to their pre-tasks sit-uation. Based on that, each task starts learning only when its pre-tasks are learned well, which can significantly im-prove the stability and efficiency of the training process.Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method. The overall model can infer more reli-able object depth than existing methods and outperforms the state-of-the-art image-based monocular 3D detectors by 3.74% and 4.7% AP40 of the car and pedestrian categories on the KITTI benchmark. The code and model will be re-leased at https://github.com/SuperMHP/GUPNet.†This work was done when Yan Lu was an intern at SenseTime.*Equal contribution. (cid:0)Corresponding authors.Figure 1. The main pipeline of our Geometry Uncertainty Projec-tion module. The projection process is modeled in the probability framework. The inference depths can be represented as a distribu-tion so that can provide both accurate values and scores. 