Panoptic segmentation as an integrated task of both static environmental understanding and dynamic object identiﬁcation, has recently begun to receive broad research interest. In this paper, we propose a new computationally efﬁcient LiDAR based panoptic segmentation framework, called GP-S3Net. GP-S3Net is a proposal-free approach in which no object proposals are needed to identify the ob-jects in contrast to conventional two-stage panoptic sys-tems, where a detection network is incorporated for cap-turing instance information. Our new design consists of a novel instance-level network to process the semantic results by constructing a graph convolutional network to identify objects (foreground), which later on are fused with the back-ground classes. Through the ﬁne-grained clusters of the foreground objects from the semantic segmentation back-bone, over-segmentation priors are generated and subse-quently processed by 3D sparse convolution to embed each cluster. Each cluster is treated as a node in the graph and its corresponding embedding is used as its node feature. Then a GCNN predicts whether edges exist between each cluster pair. We utilize the instance label to generate ground truth edge labels for each constructed graph in order to supervise the learning. Extensive experiments demonstrate that GP-S3Net outperforms the current state-of-the-art approaches, by a signiﬁcant margin across available datasets such as, nuScenes and SemanticPOSS, ranking 1st on the competi-tive public SemanticKITTI leaderboard upon publication. mantic/instance segmentation and more recently panoptic segmentation. In recent years, deep learning has been used as the main solution to object detection and segmentation.With more granular data available, specially from high res-olution LiDARs, the task of semantic/instance segmenta-tion has become a more vital part of any perception mod-ule due to generating all the fundamental perceptual infor-mation needed for robotic applications such as free space, parking area and vegetation, in addition to all dynamic ob-jects in 3D coordinates.DS-NetTORNADO-NetOursGround Truth 