Automatic security inspection using computer vision technology is a challenging task in real-world scenarios due to various factors, including intra-class variance, class imbalance, and occlusion. Most of the previous methods rarely solve the cases that the prohibited items are deliber-ately hidden in messy objects due to the lack of large-scale datasets, restricted their applications in real-world scenar-ios. Towards real-world prohibited item detection, we col-lect a large-scale dataset, named as PIDray, which covers various cases in real-world scenarios for prohibited item detection, especially for deliberately hidden items. With an intensive amount of effort, our dataset contains 12 cat-egories of prohibited items in 47, 677 X-ray images with high-quality annotated segmentation masks and bounding boxes. To the best of our knowledge, it is the largest prohib-ited items detection dataset to date. Meanwhile, we design the selective dense attention network (SDANet) to construct a strong baseline, which consists of the dense attention module and the dependency reﬁnement module. The dense attention module formed by the spatial and channel-wise dense attentions, is designed to learn the discriminative fea-tures to boost the performance. The dependency reﬁnement module is used to exploit the dependencies of multi-scale features. Extensive experiments conducted on the collectedPIDray dataset demonstrate that the proposed method per-ZDBS-LY-JSC038,∗Corresponding author (libo@iscas.ac.cn).This work was sup-ported by the Key Research Program of Frontier Sciences, CAS, the National Natural Science Foun-Grant No. dation of China, Grant No. 61807033 and Tencent Youtu Lab.Libo Zhang was supported by Youth Innovation Promotion Associa-tion, CAS (2020111), and Outstanding Youth Scientist Project of IS-CAS. The PIDray dataset are available at https://github.com/ bywang2018/security-dataset.Figure 1. Comparisons between the natural image (left) and X-ray image (right). forms favorably against the state-of-the-art methods, espe-cially for detecting the deliberately hidden items. 