Image inpainting aims to complete the missing or cor-rupted regions of images with realistic contents. The preva-lent approaches adopt a hybrid objective of reconstruction and perceptual quality by using generative adversarial net-works. However, the reconstruction loss and adversarial loss focus on synthesizing contents of different frequencies and simply applying them together often leads to inter-frequency conflicts and compromised inpainting. This pa-per presents WaveFill, a wavelet-based inpainting network that decomposes images into multiple frequency bands and fills the missing regions in each frequency band separately and explicitly. WaveFill decomposes images by using dis-crete wavelet transform (DWT) that preserves spatial in-It applies L1 reconstruction loss to formation naturally. the decomposed low-frequency bands and adversarial loss to high-frequency bands, hence effectively mitigate inter-frequency conflicts while completing images in spatial do-main. To address the inpainting inconsistency in different frequency bands and fuse features with distinct statistics, we design a novel normalization scheme that aligns and fuses the multi-frequency features effectively. Extensive experi-ments over multiple datasets show that WaveFill achieves superior image inpainting qualitatively and quantitatively.Figure 1.Image inpainting often faces a dilemma of reconstruc-tion and perceptual quality: L1/L2 loss focuses on the reconstruc-tion of global low-frequency structures while adversarial loss fo-cuses on generating high-frequency texture details. State-of-the-art approaches implicitly tackle this issue by weighted summing of the two objectives (e.g. in GMCNN [35]) or employing a Coarse-to-Fine strategy (e.g. in GC [40]), but tend to produce inconsistent distributions with missing details or artifacts. The proposed Wave-Fill disentangles images into multiple frequency bands and applies relevant losses to different bands separately, which mitigates inter-frequency conflicts and produces more realistic structures and de-tails. The distances between the ground-truth histogram and pre-diction histograms in both low-frequency (LF) and high-frequency (HF) are evaluated by Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD) [30]. 