Linear mixed-effect models provide a natural baseline for estimating disease pro-gression using longitudinal data. They provide interpretable models at the cost of modeling assumptions on the progression proﬁles and their variability across subjects. A signiﬁcant improvement is to embed the data in a Riemannian manifold and learn patient-speciﬁc trajectories distributed around a central geodesic. A few interpretable parameters characterize subject trajectories at the cost of a prior choice of the metric, which determines the shape of the trajectories. We extend this approach by learning the metric from the data allowing more ﬂexibility while keeping the interpretability. Speciﬁcally, we learn the metric as the push-forward of the Euclidean metric by a diffeomorphism. This diffeomorphism is estimated iteratively as the composition of radial basis functions belonging to a reproducible kernel Hilbert space. The metric update allows us to improve the forecasting of imaging and clinical biomarkers in the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initia-tive (ADNI) cohort. Our results compare favorably to the 56 methods benchmarked in the TADPOLE challenge.∗This work was partially supported by NIH R01AG027161 and R01EY032284.†This research has also received funding from the program "Investissements d’avenir" ANR-10-IAIHU-06.This work was also funded in part by the French government under management of Agence Nationale de laRecherche as part of the "Investissements d’avenir" program, reference ANR-19-P3IA-0001 (PRAIRIE 3IAInstitute) and by ANR under the joint programme in neurodegenerative diseases (JPND) ANR-19-JPW2-000 (E-DADS).‡Data used in preparation of this article were obtained from the Alzheimer’s Disease NeuroimagingInitiative (ADNI) database (adni.loni.usc.edu). As such, the investigators within the ADNI contributed to the design and implementation of ADNI and/or provided data but did not participate in analysis or writ-ing of this report. A complete listing of ADNI investigators can be found at: http://adni.loni.usc.edu/wp-content/uploads/how_to_apply/ADNI_Acknowledgement_List.pdf 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).