Integrating data from multiple experiments is common practice in systems neuro-science but it requires inter-experimental variability to be negligible compared to the biological signal of interest. This requirement is rarely fulﬁlled; systematic changes between experiments can drastically affect the outcome of complex anal-ysis pipelines. Modern machine learning approaches designed to adapt models across multiple data domains offer ﬂexible ways of removing inter-experimental variability where classical statistical methods often fail. While applications of these methods have been mostly limited to single-cell genomics, in this work, we develop a theoretical framework for domain adaptation in systems neuroscience. We imple-ment this in an adversarial optimization scheme that removes inter-experimental variability while preserving the biological signal. We compare our method to previ-ous approaches on a large-scale dataset of two-photon imaging recordings of retinal bipolar cell responses to visual stimuli. This dataset provides a unique benchmark as it contains biological signal from well-deﬁned cell types that is obscured by large inter-experimental variability. In a supervised setting, we compare the gener-alization performance of cell type classiﬁers across experiments, which we validate with anatomical cell type distributions from electron microscopy data. In an un-supervised setting, we remove inter-experimental variability from data which can then be fed into arbitrary downstream analyses. In both settings, we ﬁnd that our method achieves the best trade-off between removing inter-experimental variability and preserving biological signal. Thus, we offer a ﬂexible approach to remove inter-experimental variability and integrate datasets across experiments in systems neuroscience. Code available at https://github.com/eulerlab/rave.˚;Equal contributions, 1 University of Tübingen, 2 Norwegian University of Science and Technology. 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).