We propose contrastive coding to learn shared, dense image representations, re-ferred to as CoMIRs (Contrastive Multimodal Image Representations). CoMIRs enable the registration of multimodal images where existing registration methods often fail due to a lack of sufﬁciently similar image structures. CoMIRs reduce the multimodal registration problem to a monomodal one, in which general intensity-based, as well as feature-based, registration algorithms can be applied. The method involves training one neural network per modality on aligned images, using a contrastive loss based on noise-contrastive estimation (InfoNCE). Unlike other contrastive coding methods, used for, e.g., classiﬁcation, our approach generates image-like representations that contain the information shared between modalities.We introduce a novel, hyperparameter-free modiﬁcation to InfoNCE, to enforce rotational equivariance of the learnt representations, a property essential to the registration task. We assess the extent of achieved rotational equivariance and the stability of the representations with respect to weight initialization, training set, and hyperparameter settings, on a remote sensing dataset of RGB and near-infrared images. We evaluate the learnt representations through registration of a biomedical dataset of bright-ﬁeld and second-harmonic generation microscopy images; two modalities with very little apparent correlation. The proposed approach based onCoMIRs signiﬁcantly outperforms registration of representations created by GAN-based image-to-image translation, as well as a state-of-the-art, application-speciﬁc method which takes additional knowledge about the data into account. Code is available at: https://github.com/MIDA-group/CoMIR.∗Authors contributed equally. 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.Figure 1: Registration of images of different modalities (here bright-ﬁeld (BF) and second-harmonic generation imaging (SHG)) may be very challenging. CoMIR successfully estimates the shared representation of these images, and enables their successful registration by monomodal approaches.