Abstract
Model-based 3D human mesh recovery aims to recon-struct a 3D human body mesh by estimating its parame-ters from monocular RGB images. Most of recent works adopt the Skinned Multi-Person Linear (SMPL) model to regress relative rotations for each body joint along the kine-matics chain. This pipeline needs to transform each rel-ative rotation matrix into a global rotation matrix to ar-ticulate the canonical mesh, and suffers from accumulated errors along the kinematics chain. This paper proposes to directly estimate the global rotation of each joint to avoid error accumulation and pursue better accuracy. The pro-posed Sequentially Global Rotation Estimation (SGRE) di-rectly predicts the global rotation matrix of each joint on the kinematics chain. SGRE features a residual learning module to leverage complementary features and previously predicted rotations of parent joints to guide the estimation of subsequent child joints. Thanks to this global estimation pipeline and residual learning module, SGRE alleviates er-ror accumulation and produces more accurate 3D human mesh. It can be flexibly integrated into existing regression-based methods and achieves superior performance on vari-ous benchmarks. For example, it improves the latest method 3DCrowdNet by 3.3 mm MPJPE and 5.0 mm PVE on 3DPW dataset and 3.0 AP on COCO dataset, respectively†. 1.

Introduction 3D human mesh recovery aims to estimate the 3D sur-face mesh of a human body from monocular RGB images.
It has a wide range of applications in human-object in-teraction, action recognition and virtual/augmented reality.
Thanks to parametric human body models [2, 29, 33], 3D human mesh recovery can be simplified, i.e., a realistic 3D mesh of human body can be generated by a few parameters like shape parameters and joint rotations. Most of recent 3D human mesh recovery methods can be regarded as the
†Code & Model: https://github.com/kennethwdk/SGRE
Figure 1. (a) Illustration of the five kinematics chains in SMPL model. (b) Visualization of the joint rotation angle error along one of kinematics chain from root to toe. It can be observed that error increases along the chain, and our global estimation gets more ac-curate joint rotation than the relative estimation. model-based method, which estimates shape and rotation parameters to recover the 3D human mesh.
Current model-based human mesh recovery methods can be summarized into two categories according to their fol-lowed pipelines. Optimization-based approaches [4, 25] es-timate the body pose and shape parameters by an iterative fitting process. Parameters of the statistical model are tuned to reduce the error between its 2D projection and 2D ev-idences, e.g., 2D joint locations and silhouette, which can be obtained by current advanced methods [5, 40, 38, 39].
These methods can typically produce well-aligned results, but could take a long time because the optimization is non-convex. These methods are also sensitive to the initializa-tion. Regression-based methods adopt the powerful neural networks to directly regress model parameters [18, 22, 7], which have exhibited promising results. To tackle the dif-ficulty of non-linear mapping from input image to param-eter space, many regression-based methods have been pro-posed [27, 15, 42]. More detailed review of existing meth-ods can be found in Sec. 2.
Existing regression-based methods regress the relative rotation matrix for each joint with respect to (w.r.t) their parent joints along the kinematics chain as illustrated in
Fig. 1 (a). This design is partially because parametric body
SGRE presents a novel direct rotation prediction pipeline.
It is general and can be flexibly integrated into existing regression-based methods by replacing their rel-ative rotation estimation branches. We test the effective-ness of SGRE on both a baseline regression model and the latest 3DCrowdNet [7] with extensive experiments on vari-ous 3D/2D human pose and shape estimation benchmarks.
Integrating 3DCrowdNet [7] with SGRE, we achieve 78.4
MPJPE and 93.3 PVE on 3DPW [37] test set, outperform-ing the original 3DCrowdNet by 3.3 MPJPE and 5.0 PVE.
On 3DPW-OCC dataset, SGRE exhibits more substantial advantages and reduces joint errors by 4.0 MPJPE.
To the best of our knowledge, this is an original effort on global rotation estimation for 3D human mesh recov-ery. Compared with the relative rotation estimation pipeline followed by previous works, SGRE effective alleviates the error accumulation issue and produces better results. The
SGRE can be flexibly applied to recent regression-based 3D human mesh recovery works to further boosts their perfor-mance. Those advantages make SGRE a promising method for 3D human mesh recovery. 2.