Abstract
Estimating the shape and motion state of the my-ocardium is essential in diagnosing cardiovascular dis-eases. However, cine magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging is dominated by 2D slices, whose large slice spacing chal-lenges inter-slice shape reconstruction and motion acquisi-tion. To address this problem, we propose a 4D reconstruc-tion method that decouples motion and shape, which can predict the inter-/intra- shape and motion estimation from a given sparse point cloud sequence obtained from limited slices. Our framework comprises a neural motion model and an end-diastolic (ED) shape model. The implicit ED shape model can learn a continuous boundary and encour-age the motion model to predict without the supervision of ground truth deformation, and the motion model enables canonical input of the shape model by deforming any point from any phase to the ED phase. Additionally, the con-structed ED-space enables pre-training of the shape model, thereby guiding the motion model and addressing the issue of data scarcity. We propose the first 4D myocardial dataset as we know and verify our method on the proposed, public, and cross-modal datasets, showing superior reconstruction performance and enabling various clinical applications. 1.

Introduction
Heart attack, also known as myocardial infarction, is the leading cause of death worldwide [1]. Estimating the shape and motion state of the myocardium is an essential step in diagnosing cardiovascular diseases. Cardiac mag-netic resonance (CMR) imaging, which can provide suc-cessive sequence images including end-diastolic (ED) and end-systolic (ES) phases, is considered the gold standard for cardiac morphological assessment.
*Corresponding author. E-mail: yangangwang@seu.edu.cn. All the authors from Southeast University are affiliated with the Key Laboratory of Measurement and Control of Complex Systems of Engineering, Min-istry of Education, Nanjing, China. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62076061), the
Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (No. BK20220127).
Figure 1. We propose a 4D cardiac reconstruction method predict-ing the inter-/intra- shape and motion of a cardiac cycle.
However, the standard CMR has a large slice spacing, which leads to the lack of inter-slice information as shown in Fig. 1. Meanwhile, the shape and motion observation of the ventricle for clinicians are almost guided by high-resolution two-dimensional slices based on intra-slice in-formation, such as short-axis (SAX) or long-axis (LAX) views. The dense and faithful 4D (inter-/intra-) reconstruc-tion of the myocardium would assist medical profession-als in intuitively observing and accurately obtaining diverse clinical parameters [3].
The road to inter-slice reconstruction is particularly chal-lenging, as it involves estimating both inter-slice motion and shape. The lack of inter-slice motion data limits the applicability of supervised methods, thus complicating the problem. The large slice thickness of CMR leads to the inaccuracy of direct linear interpolation of pixels between slices, hindering the accurate reconstruction of the inter-slice shape. Few works have considered or fully addressed this problem. Most recent works [43, 34, 42, 46] focus only on motion estimation based on 2D plane registration, ignor-ing the motion between slices and failing to reflect the my-ocardium movement truly. Others focus solely on 3D shape reconstruction of a specific phase [4, 21, 19], without con-sidering motion information. A few methods that attempt simultaneous shape and motion reconstruction [14, 26] have limited resolution and cannot obtain dense point correspon-dence due to the complexity of cardiac motion.
In this work, we advocate to solve the inter-slice and intra-slice reconstruction as 4D myocardium reconstruc-tion. Our key idea is to decouple the problem as two steps including motion and shape reconstruction with sparse point clouds as inputs obtained from sequential
CMR slices.
Inspired by the implicit neural representa-tion [32, 27, 12, 47], we follow the point sampling strat-egy for both the motion model and shape model. Accord-ing to the characteristics of the heart sequence, we build the meaningful End-Diastolic-space (ED-space) that con-sists of a statistical parameter space representing the shape prior and a canonical spatial space suitable for model input.
This space enables us to pre-train a reliable implicit shape model, which can learn a continuous boundary and guide the implicit motion model to obtain a dense motion field without the supervision of ground truth deformation.
Specifically, for any query point under a certain phase, the motion model takes its coordinate and phase indicator as input, estimating the deformation of the point to the ED spatial space under the condition of the motion code. The pre-trained shape model estimates the signed distance func-tion (SDF) value of the deformed point under the condi-tion of shape code in the ED spatial space. Finally, the shape reconstruction is completed by extracting the bound-ary (where SDF value = 0). Our method can be applied to multiple medical image analysis tasks such as point cloud completion, dense motion estimation, and motion interpo-lation. Furthermore, it is possible to extend our method to other modes of medical imaging, such as CT.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
• We propose a new 4D myocardium reconstruction frame-work via the decoupled motion and shape features.
• We build a ED shape model based on ED-space to allevi-ate the problem of medical data scarcity.
• We present myocardial composed quence and the dataset can be downloaded from https://github.com/yuan-xiaohan/4D-M yocardium-Reconstruction-with-Decoupled
-Motion-and-Shape-Model. to our knowledge, 3D shape the first, dataset 4D se-of 2.