Abstract
We address the problem of active mapping with a continually-learned neural scene representation, namely
Active Neural Mapping. The key lies in actively finding the target space to be explored with efficient agent move-ment, thus minimizing the map uncertainty on-the-fly within a previously unseen environment. In this paper, we exam-ine the weight space of the continually-learned neural field, and show empirically that the neural variability, the predic-tion robustness against random weight perturbation, can be directly utilized to measure the instant uncertainty of the neural map. Together with the continuous geometric in-formation inherited in the neural map, the agent can be guided to find a traversable path to gradually gain knowl-edge of the environment. We present for the first time an on-line active mapping system with a coordinate-based implicit neural representation. Experiments in the visually-realistic
Gibson and Matterport3D environment demonstrate the ef-ficacy of the proposed method. 1.

Introduction
How we represent a 3D environment accurately and effi-ciently is of tremendous importance for vision, robotics, and graphics communities. Recent advances in implicit neural representations (INRs) cast the issue as a low-dimensional function regression problem. Parameterized by a single net-work θ, the quantity of interest y such as color, occupancy, and semantics can be efficiently queried with the spatial coordinates x through a feedforward pass y = f (x; θ).
Unlike traditional representations that discretize the entire space and explicitly store a set of the input-output sam-ples {xi, yi}N in manually-designed data structures such as voxel grid, surfel, and triangle mesh, the implicit neural representation is proved to have great capacity [67, 19, 77] that recovers complex signals at a constant small size, guar-anteeing high-fidelity view synthesis [42, 3, 41] and ac-curate geometry reconstruction [64, 36, 2]. Nonetheless, the quality of the learned implicit neural representation is
Figure 1: An overview of the proposed active neural map-ping system. Guided by the continually-updated neural map (visualized as the SDF values through a forward pass), the mobile agent explores the environment actively to minimize the prediction uncertainty (visualized as the prediction error given the truth surface points). highly data-dependent: as implicit neural representations are trained through self-supervision given discrete training samples, insufficient sampling frequency leads to geometric and texturing artifacts [61, 76, 77, 60].
Unlike conventional methods that rely on passive data acquisition, we address the problem of active neural map-ping, where a 3D neural field is constructed on the fly with an actively-exploring mobile agent to best represent the scene. The target is to find efficient agent movement within the previously-unknown environment to gradually minimize the map uncertainty. Similar problems such as autonomous exploration and next-best-view planning are well-studied [12, 38, 73, 69, 50] by exploiting discretized scene representations to achieve the best coverage and re-construction accuracy (see Sec. 2 for a detailed discus-sion). Though the implicit neural representation has its own merits, e.g. promising representation power and con-tinuous/differentiable properties, this problem setting poses new challenges to the INRs: new knowledge of the environ-ment is actively captured and constantly distilled to the neu-ral map, where the neural map is expected to 1) specify the uncertain areas to be explored; 2) provide reliable geomet-ric information for reconstruction; 3) allow for incremental updating given constantly observed data.
In this paper, we show for the first time a continual learning perspective of online active mapping based on the
Inspired coordinate-based implicit neural representation. by the seminal works of [66, 74], we adopt the incremen-tal updating of a continuous neural signed distance field.
The key to our active mapping solution lies in a novel un-certainty quantification manner of the learned neural map through weight perturbation. We show empirically that the replayed buffer during continual learning forces the neural network to land in a low-loss basin given previously ob-served data to avoid forgetting, while resulting in a sharp ridge given erroneously-generated zero-crossings from not-well-explored areas to ensure transferability. That is to say, as the weight changes constantly during continual learn-ing, the robustness of the predicted signed distance values exhibit distinguishable behaviors against weight perturba-tions for explored and unexplored surface samples. These findings share similar spirits with recent studies in neuro-science [37, 44, 20] and learning theory [72, 63], allowing us to explicitly reason the uncertain areas within the neural field and guide the mobile agent for actively capturing new information.
Our active mapping system adopts ideas from both frontier-based and sampling-based exploration strategies.
The neural variabilities of zero-crossing samples are ex-amined under random weight perturbations, where samples with high variation are viewed as target areas to be explored.
Along with the continually-learned geometric information, the neural map guides the agent to explore the environment actively. The key contributions can be summarized as fol-lows:
• We provide a new perspective of active mapping from the optimization dynamics of map parameters.
• We introduce an effective online active mapping sys-tem in a continual learning fashion.
• We propose a novel uncertainty quantification man-ner through weight perturbation for goal location identifi-cation. 2.