Abstract
Adversarial camouflage has garnered attention for its ability to attack object detectors from any viewpoint by cov-ering the entire object’s surface. However, universality and robustness in existing methods often fall short as the trans-ferability aspect is often overlooked, thus restricting their application only to a specific target with limited perfor-mance. To address these challenges, we present Adversar-ial Camouflage for Transferable and Intensive Vehicle Eva-sion (ACTIVE), a state-of-the-art physical camouflage at-tack framework designed to generate universal and robust adversarial camouflage capable of concealing any 3D vehi-cle from detectors. Our framework incorporates innovative techniques to enhance universality and robustness, includ-ing a refined texture rendering that enables common texture application to different vehicles without being constrained to a specific texture map, a novel stealth loss that renders the vehicle undetectable, and a smooth and camouflage loss to enhance the naturalness of the adversarial camouflage.
Our extensive experiments on 15 different models show that
ACTIVE consistently outperforms existing works on various public detectors, including the latest YOLOv7. Notably, our universality evaluations reveal promising transferability to other vehicle classes, tasks (segmentation models), and the real world, not just other vehicles. 1.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved tremen-dous outcomes in a wide range of research fields, espe-cially in computer vision, such as facial recognition and self-driving cars [8, 34, 7]. Despite their remarkable per-formance, DNNs, including object detection models, are vulnerable to adversarial attacks [2]. Generally, adversar-ial attacks can be classified into digital attacks and physical attacks [36]. Digital attacks are primarily carried out by
‡ Equal contribution
* Corresponding author (a) FCA (b) FCA on UE4 (c) DTA (d) ACTIVE (Ours) (e) Car Graffiti
Figure 1: Current state-of-the-art adversarial camouflage,
Full-coverage Camouflage Attack (FCA) [35]; (a) is un-detected as car in their original result, but (b) is normally detected when fully transferred to Unreal Engine 4 (UE4). (c) The result of the Differentiable Transformation Attack (DTA) [30], with stronger result than FCA, but limited to unnatural mosaic pattern. (d) The result of ACTIVE, which has better attack performance (i.e., not detected as a car at all), is universal (i.e., implementable to other car), and has a natural pattern comparable to (e) a real-world graffiti. adding small perturbations to pixels of input images. How-ever, digital attacks have limitations in real-world scenar-ios because they have to manipulate the digital systems that may be configured with security schemes. To alleviate these limitations, physical attacks have been proposed that mod-ify the object in the physical space rather than in the digital.
Nonetheless, physical attacks are more challenging due to the inherently complex physical constraints (camera pose, lighting, occlusion, etc.). Therefore, most physical attack methods exclude the perturbation constraint (i.e., the result can be suspicious). There are mainly two types of methods in physical attacks: adversarial patch and adversar-ial camouflage. The former [6, 32] is the method of physical
attack by attaching a small, localized patch to an object. It only covers the planar part of the object’s surface and can fail to attack the detector depending on the viewing angles.
Adversarial camouflage methods [45, 41, 39, 35, 30] have been proposed to overcome the limitations of the ad-versarial patch. This approach covers the whole surface of the object by manipulating the texture of the object, which leads to better attack performance regardless of the view-ing angles. Most of these methods use vehicles as the target objects due to their crucial role in real-world applications, such as surveillance systems and autonomous driving.
Due to the non-planarity of 3D vehicles, it is more chal-lenging to generate optimal adversarial camouflage than in its 2D counterpart. Since the general 3D rendering is non-differentiable, early research [45, 41] employed a black-box approach to generating adversarial camouflage, inevitably yielding a lower attack performance than the white-box one.
More recent research (e.g., DAS [39], FCA [35], and DTA
[30]) utilize a neural renderer to acquire the advantage of the white-box approach, which offers differentiability. In particular, DTA proposes its own neural renderer capable of expressing various physical and realistic characteristics.
Additionally, it employs its so-called Repeated Texture Pro-jection function to apply the same attack texture to other vehicle types, thus improving universality. However, DTA relies on a simple texture projection, which may result in an inaccurate texture for non-planar shapes. For improv-ing the accuracy and robustness of adversarial camouflage methods, it would be essential to bring forth a more sophis-ticated texture mapping approach.
In this paper, we propose Adversarial Camouflage for
Transferable and Intensive Vehicle Evasion (ACTIVE), a state-of-the-art adversarial camouflage framework that greatly enhances robustness, universality, and naturalness compared to previous methods, as shown in Fig. 1. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We utilize Triplanar Mapping, a sophisticated texture mapping approach available through the neural ren-derer, to generate adversarial textures with improved robustness and universality. To the best of our knowl-edge, the use of this method in generating adversarial camouflage has never been found in literature.
• We employ Stealth Loss, our novel attack loss func-tion that minimizes the detection score from all valid classes, resulting in the target vehicle being not only misclassified but also undetectable.
• We improve the naturalness of the adversarial camou-flage by utilizing larger texture resolutions than previ-ous works [45, 41, 30] and applying a smooth loss.
Furthermore, we introduce a Camouflage Loss that can enhance the camouflage of the vehicle against the background.
• Our extensive experiments demonstrate that ACTIVE consistently outperforms previous works, exhibit-ing improved universality from multiple perspectives: instance-agnostic (available on various vehicle types), class-agnostic (even across different classes such as truck and bus), model-agnostic (performing on various vehicle detectors), task-agnostic (performing on seg-mentation models), and domain-agnostic (performing in real-world scenarios). 2.