Abstract
Object detection (OD), a crucial vision task, remains challenged by the lack of large training datasets with pre-cise object localization labels.
In this work, we pro-pose ALWOD, a new framework that addresses this prob-lem by fusing active learning (AL) with weakly and semi-supervised object detection paradigms. Because the per-formance of AL critically depends on the model initializa-tion, we propose a new auxiliary image generator strat-egy that utilizes an extremely small labeled set, coupled with a large weakly tagged set of images, as a warm-start for AL. We then propose a new AL acquisition function, another critical factor in AL success, that leverages the student-teacher OD pair disagreement and uncertainty to effectively propose the most informative images to anno-tate. Finally, to complete the AL loop, we introduce a new labeling task delegated to human annotators, based on se-lection and correction of model-proposed detections, which is both rapid and effective in labeling the informative im-ages. We demonstrate, across several challenging bench-marks, that ALWOD significantly narrows the gap between the ODs trained on few partially labeled but strategically selected image instances and those that rely on the fully-labeled data. Our code is publicly available on https:
//github.com/seqam-lab/ALWOD. 1.

Introduction
Object detection (OD) is a critical vision problem. To solve it, many fully-supervised object detection (FSOD) methods have been developed to build deep neural network architectures with high detection performance [35, 15, 3] and fast inference [33, 34]. Typically, these networks are trained on large fully-annotated (FA) data, which re-quire humans to manually identify, with accurate bound-in an im-ing boxes and category labels, each object age. However, manual annotation of a large dataset is limiting the scalability of FSOD time-consuming [44], as the number of images, categories, and objects grows.
To address this, many weakly-supervised object detection (WSOD) methods [2, 45, 19, 51] have been developed.
WSOD aims to reduce the object annotation cost by lever-aging cheaper, weakly-annotated (WA) data, where an im-age instance is tagged according to the objects present in it, without the need to specify bounding boxes for each object.
Existing WSOD methods often struggle to distinguish between object parts and objects, or between objects and groups of objects [36]. The performance of WSOD methods lags behind that of FSODs since WSODs rely on weaker an-notation signals. Recently proposed semi-supervised [32, 43, 50] and few-shot [1, 29] learning approaches demon-strated that a good trade-off between annotation effort and detection performance can be achieved by first fully anno-tating a set of random images, followed by training the de-tector on a combination of large WA and small FA data.
Active learning (AL) methods [53, 5, 54, 49] aim to further reduce the size of the FA sets using acquisition functions to select the most informative images for human labeling.
AL methods can be either warm-start, which begin with a labeled set and iteratively select informative samples with feedback from the model, or cold-start, which select all in-formative samples at once without the need for an initial labeled set. Our work focuses on the warm-start setting.
To reduce the annotation cost and maximize the de-tection performance, we introduce an Active Learning for
Weakly-Supervised Object Detection (ALWOD) framework that combines semi-supervised learning with active learning by dynamically augmenting the semi-supervised set with a small set of actively selected and then fully annotated im-ages, as illustrated in Fig. 1. However, traditional warm-start AL methods commence with an FSOD model trained on a random set of FA data [5, 8], typically hundreds or thousands of images, or a WSOD model trained on a large
set of WA data [49]. While the former results in effective learning of OD models, it still requires a significant annota-tor effort at initialization; the latter strategy is less effective and necessitates more rounds of AL. To circumvent this and further reduce the annotation cost, we design an image gen-erator that leverages few FA images to synthesize a large auxiliary FA FSOD training set. Together with the WA data, the two sets are used for semi-supervised pre-training of an
OD. The auxiliary FA data can serve as a warm-start for existing AL approaches, which require initial FA data.
Our contributions are three-fold: (1) We present a new framework ALWOD to improve annotation efficiency and an-notation quality by combining active learning with weakly and semi-supervised object detection paradigms. (2) We in-troduce a new acquisition function that considers the model disagreement between student-teacher networks, coupled with image uncertainty. (3) We propose an auxiliary domain to warm up the learning process utilizing small labeled sets.
Our experimental results demonstrate that ALWOD achieves state-of-the-art performance across several benchmarks. 2.