Abstract (cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:1)(cid:2)
Anchor-based detectors have been continuously devel-oped for object detection. However, the individual an-chor box makes it difﬁcult to predict the boundary’s off-set accurately.
Instead of taking each bounding box as a closed individual, we consider using multiple boxes to-gether to get prediction boxes. To this end, this paper pro-poses the Box Decouple-Couple(BDC) strategy in the in-ference, which no longer discards the overlapping boxes, but decouples the corner points of these boxes. Then, ac-cording to each corner’s score, we couple the corner points to select the most accurate corner pairs. To meet the BDC strategy, a simple but novel model is designed named the
Anchor-Intermediate Detector(AID), which contains two head networks, i.e., an anchor-based head and an anchor-free Corner-aware head. The corner-aware head is able to score the corners of each bounding box to facilitate the cou-pling between corner points. Extensive experiments on MS
COCO show that the proposed anchor-intermediate detec-tor respectively outperforms their baseline RetinaNet and
GFL method by ∼2.4 and ∼1.2 AP on the MS COCO test-dev dataset without any bells and whistles. 1.

Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental and challenging task in computer vision to classify and localize objects in im-ages. Recently, as transformer has achieved good results in machine translation, it has begun to extend into the ﬁeld of computer vision with success in tasks such as image classi-ﬁcation [25, 23, 13, 31] and object detection [2, 6, 37, 8].
However, most current mainstream detectors are still based on convolutional neural networks. (a) Raw Image (b) Anchor-based (c) Keypoint-base Anchor-free (d) Our AID
Figure 1: The mechanism of the current mainstream de-tectors. Anchor-based detectors rely on predeﬁned anchor boxes for localization. Anchor-free detectors recombine key points to achieve localization. Our AID takes advantage of both anchor-based and anchor-free methods. It decouples the corner points of the bounding boxes and then, according to the corner’s score, the corner points are coupled to select the most accurate corner pair.
Common anchor-based detectors, such as Faster RCNN
[28], Cascade RCNN [1], YOLO [27], and RetinaNet [20], require pre-deﬁned dense anchor boxes to cover the whole image. Although the anchor box are widely used, it is still a lack of accuracy in locating the object’s boundary, be-cause the anchor box is weakly perceptive to the boundary as shown in ﬁgure 1b.
:
:
Top-Left (tl)
Corner Points
Bottom-Right (br)
Corner Points tl=0.3
Score=0.6 tl=0.9 tl=0.8
Score=0.8
Score=0.7 br=0.9 br=0.8 br=0.4
Rank Score Anchor
Score=0.8 1 2 3 0.8 0.7 0.6 (cid:171) (cid:708)a(cid:709)Non-Maximum Suppression
Rank Score Anchor
Score
Stl 1 2 3 0.8 0.7 0.6 (cid:171)
Box
Decouple 0.8 0.9 0.3 0.8 0.7 0.6 (cid:171)
Sbr 0.8 0.4 0.9
Box
Couple (cid:708)b(cid:709)Box Decouple-Couple strategy tl=0.9
Score=0.8 br=0.9
Figure 2: An illustration of the difference between the proposed BDC strategy and existing NMS. For NMS, it retains only the ﬁrst-ranked predicted box. In contrast, our BDC strategy retains the top-ranked multiple predicted boxes and re-pairs the coordinates according to their corner scores. tl denotes the coordinates of the top-left corner point. br denotes the coordinates of the bottom-right corner point. Sn denotes the score of n corner point. Score denotes the classiﬁcation score.
In contrast, some anchor-free method avoid the difﬁ-culties of the weak boundary perception.
In particular, the keypoint-based anchor-free detectors such as Corner-Net [17], CenterNet [9], and CenterNet++ [10]. Instead of predicting the object’s center and boundary’ offsets, Cor-nerNet pioneered the corner point prediction mechanism.
Concretely, the model decouples each ground truth into left-top and right-down corner points. In this paper, we name this step with a new term, Box decouple. Then, in the in-ference, CornerNet pairs all the top-left and bottom-right corner points, and this pipeline is shown in ﬁgure 1c, thus forming some bounding boxes. Similarly, we name this step
Box couple. Thus the CornerNet don’t consider the center-to-boundary perception performance, while improving the localization accuracy. Meanwhile, the net introduces an-other problem. i.e., the Box couple is very challenging.
Suppose the size of the feature map is Rw×h. Then, the number of random corner pairs is (w × h)2. Too many possible pairs tend to lead to many false positive results, so the average precise drops. CenterNet and CenterNet++ have similar shortcomings. Therefore, how to signiﬁcantly reduce the number of paired corner points is another chal-lenge we need to address.
Based on the above analysis, it is found that the keypoint-based anchor-free detectors can circumvent the drawback of anchor-based detectors but also have their attendant difﬁ-culties. Therefore, we pondered whether a trade-off can be reached between anchor-based and anchor-free algorithms.
Concretely, we can take advantage of the anchor-free detec-tor to improve the shortcomings of the anchor-based detec-tor as shown in ﬁgure 1d. Also, the Box couple dilemma in anchor-free detectors is alleviated by anchor-based detec-tors.
To this end, this paper proposes a novel architecture named the Anchor-Intermediate Detector(AID), which is based on the mainstream detection method, including the anchor-based and anchor-free head. First, the anchor-based detection head maintains the conventional training pipeline.
Then, we introduce an anchor-free corner-aware head for scoring the corner points of the bounding boxes, making it possible to enhance the boundary perception of the bound-ing boxes. In detail, during training, the corner-aware head generates two corner-aware heat maps for predicting the distribution of the object’s top-left and bottom-right corner points. Similar to CornerNet, but we don’t have to predict offsets and classiﬁcation scores. The AID innovatively inte-grates two representative detection head frameworks, while the two heads are trained in parallel with each other.
In the inference, we propose a novel post-processing strategy, named Box Decouple-Couple (BDC) strategy.
We use the proposed strategy to re-pair the corner points of each prediction box and its overlapping boxes to get more accurate localization results, as shown in ﬁgure 2 . In addi-tion, we take into account that the classiﬁcation score may not be consistent with the localization accuracy, resulting in the prediction results being not most accurately localized.
Coincidentally, the corner score can be used as the localiza-tion score based on the corner-aware heat map. So, Corner-Classiﬁcation(CoCl) score are presented, consisting of the classiﬁcation score and corner conﬁdence for ranking in
BDC strategy.
The main contributions of our work can be summarized as follows
• By analyzing the disadvantages of the current anchor-based and anchor-free models, we propose the novel
AID, which can achieve a trade-off between the two
detection frameworks to improve the detection accu-racy of the model.
In training,
• We have redesigned the training and inference pipelines separately. the anchor-based detection head and the corner-aware head share the backbone network and the feature pyramid network.
Both are trained synchronously. During inference, we
ﬁrst propose a new corner-classiﬁcation score for post-processing. Then, our proposed BDC strategy rethinks the value of each prediction box and its overlapping boxes, from which we reﬁne predictions with better localization quality.
• The AID uses the corner-aware head as the anchor-free head, and the anchor-based head uses some main methods, including RetinaNet, GFL, etc., while based on some backbone networks, including ResNet-50,
ResNet-101, ResNeXt-101, etc. Also, our method achieved state-of-the-art results on the MS COCO dataset. 2.