Abstract
Accurately estimating the 3D pose and shape is an es-sential step towards understanding animal behavior, and can potentially benefit many downstream applications, such as wildlife conservation. However, research in this area is held back by the lack of a comprehensive and diverse dataset with high-quality 3D pose and shape annotations.
In this paper, we propose Animal3D, the first comprehen-sive dataset for mammal animal 3D pose and shape esti-mation. Animal3D consists of 3379 images collected from 40 mammal species, high-quality annotations of 26 key-points, and importantly the pose and shape parameters of the SMAL [50] model. All annotations were labeled and checked manually in a multi-stage process to ensure highest quality results. Based on the Animal3D dataset, we bench-mark representative shape and pose estimation models at: (1) supervised learning from only the Animal3D data, (2) synthetic to real transfer from synthetically generated im-ages, and (3) fine-tuning human pose and shape estimation models. Our experimental results demonstrate that predict-ing the 3D shape and pose of animals across species re-mains a very challenging task, despite significant advances in human pose estimation. Our results further demonstrate that synthetic pre-training is a viable strategy to boost the model performance. Overall, Animal3D opens new direc-tions for facilitating future research in animal 3D pose and shape estimation, and is publicly available. 1.

Introduction
Accurately estimating the 3D pose and shape of animals is a crucial step toward understanding their behavior and has a wide range of applications in fields such as wildlife conservation, animal ecology, and biomechanics. 3D ani-mal pose and shape estimation involves the reconstruction of the 3D structure of an animal from a single 2D image, which is a challenging task due to the complex shapes and poses of animals in the wild. Previous works in this area have primarily focused on specific animals, such as humans
[16, 17] or dogs [37, 45], which limits the generalization ability of the models to other animals. Therefore, there is a need for a diverse dataset of animals to allow for more generalizable and robust models to be developed.
In this paper, we propose Animal3D, the first benchmark for mammal animal 3D pose and shape estimation. Ani-mal3D is a comprehensive dataset consisting of 3379 high-quality images collected from 40 mammal species. The im-ages were carefully selected from existing datasets, in par-ticular PartImageNet [11] and COCO [24], to ensure that they represent a diverse range of animals, including pri-mates, ungulates, carnivores, and rodents (Figure 1). The diversity of animal species included in the dataset ensures that the models are not limited to specific animals and can be applied to a wide range of species. Each image was an-notated with 26 keypoints, which were carefully labeled and checked in a mutli-stage process to ensure high-quality an-notations that can be used for further research. Based on the keypoint annotation and the available segmentation masks in PartImageNet and COCO, we annotate the 3D shape and pose by fitting the SMAL [50] model to the data. SMAL is a widely used model for 3D animal pose and shape es-timation and similarly structured as the SMPL [26] model, hence supporting wide applicability of our annotations.
Using the Animal3D dataset, we benchmark representa-tive shape and pose estimation models at three levels: (1) supervised learning for animal pose estimation, (2) syn-thetic to real transfer from synthetically generated images, and (3) fine-tuning human pose and shape estimation mod-els. Based on our experimental results we provide an anal-1
Figure 1: Samples from the proposed Animal3D dataset. Our dataset contains a diverse range of animal species with high-quality annotations of shape and pose parameters using the popular SMAL [50] model. ysis of the strengths and limitations of each method, which demonstrate the versatility of our benchmark, as well as its challenging nature, since none of the representative ap-proaches achieves a similarly good performance as on the specialized benchmarks they were designed for.
Animal3D is a significant step towards facilitating fu-ture research in animal 3D pose and shape estimation. The dataset will allow researchers to advance the understanding of animal behavior and ecology through 3D pose and shape estimation. Additionally, the dataset has the potential to benefit many downstream applications. The models devel-oped using the Animal3D dataset can be applied to a wide range of animals, potentially leading to new discoveries and insights into animal behavior and ecology. Access the data via: https://xujiacong.github.io/Animal3D
In summary, our main contributions are:
• We present Animal3D, the first benchmark for mam-mal animal 3D pose and shape estimation, with a di-verse set of 40 mammal species, and high-quality an-notations of 2D keypoints as well as 3D shape and pose parameters of the SMAL [50] model.
• We set up a set of baselines on Animal3D in various settings using state-of-the-art methods which demon-strates the versatility of the dataset.
• Our experimental results and in-depth analysis of the strengths and limitations of representative methods demonstrate the challenging nature of our benchmark. 2.