Abstract
We demonstrate a compact, cost-effective snapshot spec-tral imaging system named Aperture Diffraction Imaging
Spectrometer (ADIS), which consists only of an imaging lens with an ultra-thin orthogonal aperture mask and a mo-saic ﬁlter sensor, requiring no additional physical footprint compared to common RGB cameras. Then we introduce a new optical design that each point in the object space is multiplexed to discrete encoding locations on the mo-saic ﬁlter sensor by diffraction-based spatial-spectral pro-jection engineering generated from the orthogonal mask.
The orthogonal projection is uniformly accepted to ob-tain a weakly calibration-dependent data form to enhance modulation robustness. Meanwhile, the Cascade Shift-Shufﬂe Spectral Transformer (CSST) with strong percep-tion of the diffraction degeneration is designed to solve a sparsity-constrained inverse problem, realizing the volume reconstruction from 2D measurements with Large amount of aliasing. Our system is evaluated by elaborating the imaging optical theory and reconstruction algorithm with demonstrating the experimental imaging under a single ex-posure. Ultimately, we achieve the sub-super-pixel spatial resolution and high spectral resolution imaging. The code will be available at: https://github.com/Krito-ex/CSST. 1.

Introduction
Snapshot spectral imaging (SSI) refers to the acquisition of a 3D spatial-spectral data cube containing spectral in-formation at each spatial location in a single exposure [1].
Whereas spectrum is a fundamental property that covers the physical characteristics of scenes, the visual and discrimina-tive capabilities along the spectral and temporal dimensions will lead to unparalleled high-dimensional visual capabil-ity [2]. Hence, the acquisition of high temporal-spatial-spectral resolution data can provide a more comprehensive and reﬁned observation and measurement of dynamic ob-jects or processes.
*Corresponding author
Figure 1. (a) illustrates the CTIS acquisition method and strat-egy of using long optical path with sacriﬁcing spatial resolution, while ADIS reconstructs from aliasing; (b) depicts different imag-ing methods for mosaic ﬁlter sensors.
Compared with scanning strategies of traditional imag-ing spectrometers along the spatial or spectral dimension,
SSI methods perform speciﬁc system designs [3, 4, 5, 6] based on the intrinsic sparsity of the spatial-spectral infor-mation of a scene through predeﬁned and well-calibrated modulation or projection paradigms, which can achieve video-level capture of spectral data and have the potential for a wide range of applications in various scenarios such as combustion dynamics [7], cellular dynamics [8], indus-trial monitoring [9].
However, shortcomings in the compactness, the spatial-temporal-spectral resolution of the imaging system, and the robustness of the modulation limit the application of SSI where portability is paramount [10, 11]:
SSI systems based on computational imaging methods recover the spectral cube by encoding the incident light and solving an underdetermined, sparsity-constrained inverse problem. However, the current prevailing designs rely on bulky relay systems, prisms, or other dispersive elements that result in massive and complex optical systems [10].
Among these, dispersive methods exempliﬁed by CTIS [4]
obviate the need for spatial modulation at the relay system’s focal plane, offering the potential for compact design. How-ever, as shown in Figure 1(a), CTIS takes measures of long optical length and sacriﬁces spatial resolution to reduce the degree of data aliasing. In contrast, we propose a frame-work that utilizes a single mask at non-focal plane locations to achieve diffractive effects previously accomplished with complex gratings. Speciﬁc orthogonal mask diffraction can generate multiplexed spatial spectral projections to recon-struct 3D data cubes without sacriﬁcing system integration, which consists of two sets of parallel lines with orthogo-nal directions. Overall, ADIS greatly improves the com-pactness of spectral imaging systems with the same level of integration and manufacturing cost as common RGB or monochrome cameras.
The ﬁlter array-based SSI schemes have a compact ar-chitecture, but as shown in Figure 1(b), the ﬁlter array it-self is a sampling trade-off in spatial-spectral dimensions, sacriﬁcing the spatial or spectral resolving ability of imag-ing systems [12]. The encoding potential of the ﬁlter ar-ray, however, opens the door to an inverse solution process in ADIS. So a novel encoding scheme is adopted, treat-ing the ﬁlter array as a sub-super-resolution encoding array with periodicity. Further, we establish a Transformer-based deep unfolding method, CSST, with orthogonal degrada-tion perception that simultaneously captures local contents and non-local dependencies to meet the challenge of re-constructing convincing sub-super-resolution results from highly confounded measurements.
Additionally, existing SSI technologies rely on multi-ple optical devices to complete optical encoding in physical space, and its accuracy in practical applications depends on the spatial-spectral mapping relationship determined by the calibration position of optical components, while the ADIS proposed maintains spatial invariance. Under arbitrary per-turbation to the aperture mask, it still uniformly maintains the mixed spectral encoding generated by the optical multi-plexer to solve the movement problem faced in actual mea-surement. Furthermore, when the physical parameters of the optical device are determined, the distance between the optical combiner and the sensor is the only variable that af-fects the spectral mapping. Therefore, ADIS reconstruction only relies on the constant parameters of the system and the distance between the system and the imaging plane, without any complicated calibration.
In summary, speciﬁc contributions are:
•
A novel SSI framework with an optical multiplexer, en-abling high-ﬁdelity and compact snapshot spectral imaging, offering greater resilience against extraneous perturbations.
A novel diffraction-projection-guided algorithm for hyperspectral reconstruction, capturing the intricate depen-dencies of diffraction-guided spatial-spectral mapping.
•
A prototype device demonstrating excellent hyperspec-• tral acquisition and reconstruction performance.
Theoretical derivation, structural analysis and neces-• sary trade-offs for system and algorithm design. 2.