Abstract
This paper describes an attention-driven approach to 3-D point cloud sampling. We establish our method based on a structure-aware attention discriminant analysis that ex-plores geometric and semantic relations embodied among points and their clusters. The proposed attention discrim-inant sampling (ADS) starts by efﬁciently decomposing a given point cloud into clusters to implicitly encode its struc-tural and geometric relatedness among points. By treating each cluster as a structural component, ADS then draws on evaluating two levels of self-attention: within-cluster and between-cluster. The former reﬂects the semantic complex-ity entailed by the learned features of points within each cluster, while the latter reveals the semantic similarity be-tween clusters. Driven by structurally preserving the point distribution, these two aspects of self-attention help avoid sampling redundancy and decide the number of sampled points in each cluster. Extensive experiments demonstrate that ADS signiﬁcantly improves classiﬁcation performance to 95.1% on ModelNet40 and 87.5% on ScanObjectNN and achieves 86.9% mIoU on ShapeNet Part Segmentation. For scene segmentation, ADS yields 91.1% accuracy on S3DIS with higher mIoU to the state-of-the-art and 75.6% mIoU on
ScanNetV2. Furthermore, ADS surpasses the state-of-the-art with 55.0% mAP50 on ScanNetV2 object detection. 1.

Introduction
Point cloud sampling is an essential step for designing practical solutions to the respective 3-D computer vision applications. While existing such techniques mostly rely on utilizing distance-based geometric information to yield efﬁcient sampling, their main drawback is the lack of con-sideration of both the semantic and the structural aspects of the underlying point cloud distribution, as shown in Fig-ure 1. We aim to introduce a cluster-based formulation that leverages the proposed discriminant attention analysis to implicitly achieve structure-aware point cloud sampling.
With the great success of deep learning in solving 2-D computer vision problems, many studies now have turned
Figure 1. Overview. Unlike distance-based sampling strategies, e.g. Farthest Point Sampling (FPS), the proposed structure-aware
Attention Discriminant Sampling (ADS) explores both geometric and semantic information to improve representation learning and sampling efﬁciency for 3-D point clouds. to dealing with realistic and challenging 3-D tasks. It is known that 3-D data can often be represented in various formats, including depth images, volume grids (voxels), mul-tiple ﬂat polygons (meshes), and point clouds. Among them, point clouds are raw data obtained by scanning objects with instruments, e.g., LiDAR scanners and multibeam sonars.
Depending on the functionality of the instrument, the point coordinates can be accompanied with other useful informa-tion such as colors and normal vectors. As the point cloud representation retains original geometry information with-out any distortion, it is suitable for various applications that require 3-D scene understanding, including autonomous nav-igation, virtual reality, robotics, etc. However, the irregular and unstructured data format often makes learning directly from raw 3-D point clouds inefﬁcient. Previous approaches have addressed this issue of vast computation via prepro-cessing, for example, by projecting point clouds to depth images [37, 38] and enabling CNNs to tackle the resulting tasks. The other feasible reduction is to consider voxelization by simplifying the data into rasterized grid [27, 8, 49], which is applicable to 3-D convolutional networks. Although such attempts could ease the computation demand, they may still lead to unstable performance when dealing with intricate
Figure 2. The proposed Attention Discriminant Sampling (ADS) framework comprises three main processes: clustering, attention, and sampling. Unlike the conventional Set Abstraction (SA) module, ADS initially groups the points via clustering, which serves to implicitly identify parts or objects within the entire scene. The subsequent sampling step is then cluster-wise performed by taking account of the attention responses from within-cluster and between-cluster evaluations, the size, and the complexity of each cluster to determine the respective sampling ratio. Taking, for example, sampling with ADS as input for part segmentation, we show the performance gain (yellow bar) and a performance upper bound (orange bar) when replacing the clustering outcome in ADS with exact information of part labels. scenes or objects of complex shapes.
As one of the pioneer frameworks on learning with point clouds, PointNet [30] is developed to extract point features directly from the raw data. It overcomes the unordered prop-erty of a point cloud via the use of a simple symmetric func-tion (i.e., max pooling), and yields invariant representation through the proposed T-net with coordinates transformation.
However, PointNet does not model local context well and may not capture objects of various scales properly. The im-proved version, PointNet++ [32], is therefore introduced; it employs hierarchical learning architecture that consists of several set abstraction layers. Such layers apply sampling and grouping to abstract local regions and achieve the bal-ance between efﬁciency and performance. From the two frameworks and their related applications, the effective use of point cloud sampling to the end results of downstream tasks has emerged as a crucial factor. While the majority of point cloud techniques, including [30, 32], adopt farthest point sampling (FPS) [29], we are motivated to develop a point-cloud sampling strategy beyond the perspective of distance-based reasoning.
The main idea behind our approach is motivated by the observation that point cloud sampling could better repre-sent the original raw data if information about the structural components and complexities of the underlying object has been made available. Suppose that for each object part we know its corresponding points, the semantic complexity, and relatedness to other components. Such information can then be used to decide how to apportion the speciﬁed number of points for sampling, while retaining its object structure properly.
In practice, the structural information is often not present; however, it is reasonable to group the points into clusters and design an efﬁcient cluster-based sampling scheme that is designed to conceptually approximate the above-mentioned ideal case. To simultaneously explore se-mantic and geometric properties of a point cloud, we intro-duce attention discriminant sampling (ADS) that leverages feature similarities with spatial relationships to select those points that are representative in both aspects and induce less redundancy. As shown in Figure 1, the proposed ADS ﬁrst divides a point cloud into clusters, and enables the algorithm to consider sampling at point-wise and cluster-wise levels.
Our method then calculates self-attention relations of the points within each cluster and between clusters to determine how the sampled points are distributed among the clusters.
Unlike other attention-based 3-D approaches [52, 59] that only consider the points within each subset obtained by far-thest point sampling (FPS) [29], ADS assesses semantic and geometric relations of the points locally (within each cluster) and globally (between clusters) and utilizes these self-attention responses to achieve effective and representa-tive point-cloud sampling. Figure 2 illustrates the advantage of the ADS scheme for the downstream task of part segmen-tation, compared with the performance upper bound obtained when part information is provided for the sampling step. 2.