Abstract 1.

Introduction
We propose a novel approach to animate human hair in a still portrait photo. Existing work has largely stud-ied the animation of fluid elements such as water and fire.
However, hair animation for a real image remains un-derexplored, which is a challenging problem, due to the high complexity of hair structure and dynamics. Consid-ering the complexity of hair structure, we innovatively treat hair wisp extraction as an instance segmentation problem, where a hair wisp is referred to as an instance. With ad-vanced instance segmentation networks, our method ex-tracts meaningful and natural hair wisps. Furthermore, we propose a wisp-aware animation module that animates hair wisps with pleasing motions without noticeable arti-facts. The extensive experiments show the superiority of our method. Our method provides the most pleasing and compelling viewing experience in the qualitative experi-ments, and outperforms state-of-the-art still-image anima-tion methods by a large margin in the quantitative evalu-ation. Project url: https://nevergiveu.github. io/AutomaticHairBlowing/
”His silvery hair was blowing in the wind,” George R.R.
Martin described. Hair is one of the most impressive parts of the human body [61, 77], while its dynamics make a deeper impression and make the scene vivid. The stud-ies show that dynamics is more compelling and captivating than a still image. Massive portrait photos are shared every day on social media platforms such as TikTok and Insta-gram. People want their photos to be attractive and artis-tic. This motivates us to explore animating human hair in a still image, so as to provide a vivid, pleasing and beautiful viewing experience. Recent methods [19, 52, 26] have been proposed to augment a still image with dynamics, which an-imates fluid elements such as water, smoke and fire in the image. However, these methods haven’t taken human hair into account for real photos.
To provide an artistic effect, we focus on animating hu-man hair in a portrait photo, while translating the photo into a cinemagraph [68, 1]. Cinemagraph is an innovative short-video format preferred by professional photographers, ad-vertisers, and artists, and it is used in digital advertisements, social media, landing pages, etc. The engaging nature of the
∗ Corresponding Author.
Celebrated novelist of ”Wild Cards”, ”A Game of Thrones”, etc. [75]
cinemagraph is that it integrates the merits of still photos and videos [56, 52, 4]. That is, some regions in a cinema-graph contain small motions in a short loop, while the rest remain static. The contrast between static and moving el-ements helps to capture viewers’ attention. Translating a portrait photo into a cinemagraph with subtle hair motions would make the photo to be more compelling yet not dis-tract viewers from static content.
Existing methods (e.g. [56, 84]) and commercial soft-ware ([20, 22, 2]) generate a high-fidelity cinemagraph from an input video by freezing selective video regions. These tools are not applicable to a still image. On the other hand, still-image animation has attracted increasing atten-tion [19, 52, 26]. Most approaches explore animating fluid elements such as clouds, water, and smoke. However, hair is made of fibrous materials, leading to its dynamics be-ing rather different from that of fluid elements. Different from fluid element animation which has been largely inves-tigated, human hair animation is much less been explored for a real portrait photo.
Animating hair in a still portrait photo is a challenging problem. Research on hair modeling, which aims to re-construct plausible hair for virtual humans, has revealed the high complexity of hair in terms of structure and dynamics.
For example, different from human body or face that has smooth surfaces, hair comprises around hundred-thousand components i.e. hair strands, leading to intricate structures.
Furthermore, such a massive number of fibrous components result in non-uniform and complicated motions within the hair as well as temporal collisions between hair and head.
Many hair modeling approaches address hair complexity by resorting to specialized hair capture techniques (e.g. dense camera array and high-speed cameras). Thus, static hair modeling approaches [30, 51, 54, 62] construct high-quality 3D models of static hair, and dynamic hair modeling ap-proaches [72, 83] achieve impressive results in reconstruct-ing hair motions at strand level. However, these approaches suffer from expensive time costs or rely on complex hard-ware setups to capture real-world hair.
In this paper, we propose a novel method that automati-cally animates hair in a still portrait photo without any user assistance or sophisticated hardware. We observe that hu-man visual system is much less sensitive to hair strands and their motions in a real portrait video, compared to synthetic strands of a digitized human in a virtual environment. Our insight is that we can animate hair wisps rather than strands which can create a perceptually pleasing viewing experi-ence. We hence propose a hair wisp animation module to animate hair wisps, enabling an efficient solution.
The arising challenge is how to extract hair wisps. Al-though relevant work such as hair modeling investigates hair segmentation, these approaches focus on extracting the whole hair region, which is different from our aim. To ex-tract meaningful hair wisps, we innovatively treat hair wisp extraction as an instance segmentation problem, where a segment instance from a still image is referred to as a hair wisp. Thanks to such a problem definition, we can exploit instance segmentation networks to realize the extraction of hair wisps. This largely simplifies the hair wisp extraction problem, but also advanced networks can effectively extract hair wisps. Furthermore, we construct a hair wisp dataset that consists of real portrait photos to train the networks. We also propose a semi-annotation scheme to produce ground-truth annotations of hair wisps.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel approach that automatically animates blowing hair from a still portrait image.
Our method effectively handles high-resolution im-ages, while generating high-quality and aesthetically-pleasing cinemagraphs without any user assistance.
• We show that instance segmentation facilitates the an-imation of hair blowing, which is helpful in generating realistic blowing motions.
• We propose a hair wisp animation module that gener-ates pleasing motions for hair wisps without noticeable artifacts. 2.