Abstract
We present Basis Restricted Elastic Shape Analysis (BaRe-ESA), a novel Riemannian framework for human body scan representation, interpolation and extrapolation.
BaRe-ESA operates directly on unregistered meshes, i.e., without the need to establish prior point to point corre-spondences or to assume a consistent mesh structure. Our method relies on a latent space representation, which is equipped with a Riemannian (non-Euclidean) metric asso-ciated to an invariant higher-order metric on the space of surfaces. Experimental results on the FAUST and DFAUST datasets show that BaRe-ESA brings significant improve-ments with respect to previous solutions in terms of shape registration, interpolation and extrapolation. The efficiency and strength of our model is further demonstrated in appli-cations such as motion transfer and random generation of body shape and pose. 1.

Introduction
Over the past decade there has been an increased inter-est in analyzing the morphological variability of the human anatomy. In particular, the issue of modeling and retriev-ing changes in full body shape and pose has a wide range of graphics applications spanning from 3D human model-ing, to augmented and virtual reality for animated films and computer games. In these applications one is interested in a framework that allows for operations such as shape inter-polation [16], – the task of finding a plausible deformation between two given body scans – shape extrapolation, – the task of finding a plausible deformation given a body scan and a corresponding initial deformation (movement) – and random shape generation. Furthermore, one is interested in
This work was supported by ANR projects 16-IDEX-0004 (ULNE) and by ANR-19-CE23-0020 (Human4D); by NSF grants DMS-1912037,
DMS-1953244, DMS-1945224 and DMS-1953267, and by FWF grant
FWF-P 35813-N. Corresponding Author: M. Bauer (bauer@math.fsu.edu) obtaining a natural disentanglement of changes in the pose and in the shape of the human body [15], which in turn will allow for operations such as motion transfer [5].
Motivation: A major challenge in the context of human body shape analysis is the registration problem, i.e. raw scans of human bodies are usually not equipped with any point correspondences and will, in general, not even ad-mit a consistent mesh structure. Traditionally this issue has been tackled by finding new representations of the meshes with a consistent mesh structure and estimated point cor-respondences using an external framework such as func-tional maps [38, 35]. This data preprocessing step is then followed with an independent framework for the analysis of parametrized shapes, such as the As-Rigid-As-Possible (ARAP) energy [45] or the as isometric as possible en-ergy [27]. In recent years, in the context of general func-tional data analysis, it has been shown that such a sepa-ration into registration and subsequent analysis can intro-duce a significant bias into the resulting statistical analy-sis, and it has been acknowledged that a significant increase in performance can be obtained by using an unified ap-proach [46, 25].
Contribution: Towards this aim we introduce a new pipeline that quantifies geometric differences between un-registered human body scans, i.e., that does not require prior point correspondences or consistent parametrization across the dataset. Furthermore, we are not only interested in a pure metric comparison of two individuals, but also in es-timating plausible deformation processes from one human body to the other. To that end, we introduce a transforma-tion model that allows to disentangle changes in the pose and in the shape of the human body so as to obtain realistic ways to interpolate from one scan to another, extrapolate a given motion or transpose it to a new individual and even to generate visually plausible random pose and shapes; see
Figure 1 for a schematic visualization of our framework. It is important to highlight that, through the use of the varifold representation and kernel metrics, our approach does not re-1
Unparameterized human shapes
Applications:
Body scan Parameterization
Human body latent code retrieval
Human shape interpolation
Pose
Latent path
Affine decoder
Pullback metric
Motion transfer
Latent space
Shape
Parameterized human shape space with Sobolev Riemannian metric
Shape Generation
Figure 1: Overwiew of our method. We seek to represent unparameterized human bodies, with different mesh connectivity, and possible noise or topological changes in a disentangled latent space. We define our latent space as the sum of pose and shape spaces. The paths in the latent space are not linear but curved, corresponding to geodesics in the paramaterized human body space. After retrieving the latent codes of the human bodies, we can use the space along with its Riemmanian metric to solve several problems in human body deformation: inter-extrapolation, motion transfer, shape generation. quire having a consistent mesh structure across the dataset and performs well on human body scans with different num-bers of vertices and even under the presence of topological noise (e.g. holes in the scans). Furthermore, unlike current deep learning frameworks for human body analysis, the en-coding component in our approach relies on pre-trained de-formation bases for the shape and pose changes but is cou-pled with a non-Euclidean metric in the latent space. Thus the training of our model is notably simple and does not re-quire large amount of training data. Moreover, as our results suggest, it leads to better properties when it comes to the in-terpretability of human body paths and the generalization to unseen data. 2.