Abstract 3D reconstruction techniques have widely been used for digital documentation of archaeological fragments. How-ever, efficient digital capture of fragments remains as a chal-lenge.
In this work, we aim to develop a portable, high-throughput, and accurate reconstruction system for efficient digitization of fragments excavated in archaeological sites.
To realize high-throughput digitization of large numbers of objects, an effective strategy is to perform scanning and reconstruction in batches. However, effective batch-based scanning and reconstruction face two key challenges: 1) how to correlate partial scans of the same object from mul-tiple batch scans, and 2) how to register and reconstruct complete models from partial scans that exhibit only small overlaps. To tackle these two challenges, we develop a new batch-based matching algorithm that pairs the front and back sides of the fragments, and a new Bilateral Boundary
ICP algorithm that can register partial scans sharing very narrow overlapping regions. Extensive validation in labs and testing in excavation sites demonstrate that these de-signs enable efficient batch-based scanning for fragments.
We show that such a batch-based scanning and reconstruc-tion pipeline can have immediate applications on digitizing sherds in archaeological excavations. Our project page: https://jiepengwang.github.io/FIRES/. 1.

Introduction
Digital documentation of archaeological artifacts is widely used in archaeological heritage preservation and vir-tual restoration [25, 4, 18, 34]. Sherds, also referred to as fragments, are the most commonly uncovered artifacts dur-ing archaeological excavations and they carry rich informa-tion about past human societies, so their 3D shapes need to be accurately reconstructed and digitally archived for anal-ysis and preservation. At an excavation site, typically hun-*Corresponding author. (a) (b) (c)
Figure 1: Illustration of batch processing of sherds. (a)
Fast image acquisition device; (b) Reference images of the front sides and back sides of a batch of fragments; and (c)
Reconstructed 3D sherds. dreds of fragments are uncovered in a day, far beyond the scanning and reconstruction capacity of existing imaging systems [27, 1, 23, 19]. Hence, there is high demand for methods and systems capable of scanning and reconstruct-ing hundreds of fragments per day.
The most promising approach to high throughput scan-ning of sherds is via batch processing. A straightforward flow of batching processing works as follows. First, all the fragments to be processed are divided into groups of 5 - 20 fragments per group, with the specific number depending on the sizes of the fragments. For each group, the following three steps of operation are performed.
Step 1 - Front side reconstruction. The group of frag-ments are manually placed flat on a turning-table and im-aged by several fixed cameras in a couple of minutes. For easy of reference, we call the upward sides of the fragments at this moment their front sides. See Fig. 1 (a). Then the ac-quired images are used by an off-the-shelf MVS software to automatically reconstruct the 3D models of the front sides.
Step 2 - Back side reconstruction. In order to scan the complete models, the fragments are manually flipped over and placed again on the turntable. Then the back sides of the fragments are scanned (Fig. 1 (b)) and reconstructed in a similar fashion.
Step 3 - Full model registration. Now we have obtained the reconstructed partial 3D models of the front sides and
back sides of the group of fragments obtained in Step 1 and
Step 2. Then, for each fragment, the two 3D models for its corresponding front side and back side which are also called the front scan and back scan, are automatically identified and registered together to produce the complete 3D model of the fragment (as shown in Fig. 1(c)).
Challenges. While steps 1 and 2 in the above are techni-cally straightforward in principle, step 3 of full model regis-tration poses new technical challenges that need to be tack-led with novel techniques to achieve. The main challenges are two-fold. First, given the front scan of each fragment, it is nontrivial to efficiently and reliably find its corresponding back scan from the back side batch. This is a known out-standing problem [15] with no effective solution. Second, once a pair of the front scan and back scan of the same frag-ment are identified, in order to apply the ICP registration method to register them together to obtain the full 3D model of the fragment, it is critical to develop robust techniques to provide reliable initial relative pose estimation for the ICP to start. Furthermore, we note that the front and back scans commonly have very small overlapping regions, i.e. the thin side strip regions of the fragment (See the figure below), which contain usually many repetitive fractured patterns and lack sufficient unique geometric features.
Therefore, in the presence of such small overlap between the front and back scans, it presents significant challenges to existing ICP-like meth-ods [39, 11, 38] and feature-based registration methods
[29, 24, 41]. It is hard to ensure that points (or a feature) from one side used in registration have proper correspond-ing points (or a feature) on the other side. Again, there are no existing registration methods that can reliably solves these problems to achieve successful registration to produce accurate full 3D models of the fragments in an automatic, fast, and robust manner.
To address these issues, we provide a novel contour-based solution to solve batch matching and a boundary-aware ICP method to tackle fine registration to obtain com-plete models. We first discuss the problem of matching the front and back scans. We observe that the 3D contour of a fragment can be approximated by its 2D projection on the fitting plane (e.g., using PCA), and the contour of this 2D projected region can be used as a reliable shape representa-tion of the the fragments. Clearly, the 2D contours of the front scan and back scan of the same fragment should be highly similar. Hence, we devise a novel, intrinsic shape descriptor to encode each 2D contour, and then perform fast comparison of the shape descriptors of all the 2D contours to identify the pairing between the corresponding front and back scans. Our experiments show that this method is effi-cient and robust in finding all the matching pairs.
After the pair of front and back scans are identified, we need to estimate a good initial alignment of the two scan in order to proceed with ICP registration. In this regards, we point out that, when a pair of scans are successfully matched, the above method based on 2D-contours also pro-duces a good alignment of the 2D contours of the two scans, which induces a good initial alignment 3D scans themselves for the subsequent ICP iterations. The details of this step with explained in detail later.
Finally, after each fragment’s front and back scans are paired and initially aligned, we will register them to get a complete 3D sherd model. To address of the issue of small overlap and the lack of salient textures and features in the small overlapping region of the two scans, we pro-pose a boundary-based ICP method to ensure robust ICP iterations. Specifically, we extract the 3D boundary points of one scan and iteratively search and minimize their dis-tances to their corresponding points on the other side. Here the 3D boundary points refer to the points on the bound-ary of the point cloud surface of the front scan or the back scan. we use these 3D boundary points rather than all the points in the overlapping region for closest point searching because it is more likely for such boundary points to find their corresponding points on the other scan.
Enabled by our novel batch-based model registration method, the partial front and back 3D scans be efficiently and automatically registered to produce complete 3D mod-els of sherds in high throughput. To validate our method, we built a turntable-based image acquisition device to capture the images of multiple fragments in a batch mode, as the in-put of our batch-based registration method. We demonstrate that this batch-based approach can scan and reconstruct over 700 fragments in 10 working hours , with high reconstruc-tion accuracy, which is significantly faster than existing im-age acquisition systems and meets the throughput demand of archaeological field works.
To summarize, we made the following contributions:
• Batch-based matching: To support high-throughput batch-mode scanning and reconstruction of sherds, we propose a novel matching algorithm for matching the front partial 3D scans and the front partial 3D scans of a group of sherds. This solves an outstanding problem arising in batch-based sherd reconstruction.
• An improved registration method: We develop an improved ICP method, called a Bilateral Boundary
ICP (BBICP), that overcomes the issue of small over-laps to robustly and accurately register the correspond-ing front and back 3D scans of each fragment to pro-duce its complete 3D model.
• Validation and dataset: We conducted extensive val-idation to demonstrate that our algorithmic contribu-tions enables efficient and robust scanning and recon-struction of sherd that is more than 10 times faster than existing 3D acquisition systems for sherds. We also a dataset containing 123 fragments of different geome-tries, sizes, and textures to to facilitate future research on batch-based model registration for 3D reconstruc-tion of archaeological fragments.
The code and dataset will be made publicly available. 2.