Abstract
While 3D body reconstruction methods have made re-markable progress recently, it remains difﬁcult to acquire the sufﬁciently accurate and numerous 3D supervisions re-quired for training.
In this paper, we propose KNOWN, a framework that effectively utilizes body KNOWledge and uNcertainty modeling to compensate for insufﬁcient 3D supervisions. KNOWN exploits a comprehensive set of generic body constraints derived from well-established body knowledge. These generic constraints precisely and explicitly characterize the reconstruction plausibility and enable 3D reconstruction models to be trained without any 3D data. Moreover, existing methods typically use im-ages from multiple datasets during training, which can result in data noise (e.g., inconsistent joint annotation) and data imbalance (e.g., minority images representing un-usual poses or captured from challenging camera views).
KNOWN solves these problems through a novel probabilis-tic framework that models both aleatoric and epistemic un-certainty. Aleatoric uncertainty is encoded in a robust Neg-ative Log-Likelihood (NLL) training loss, while epistemic uncertainty is used to guide model reﬁnement. Experi-ments demonstrate that KNOWN’s body reconstruction out-performs prior weakly-supervised approaches, particularly on the challenging minority images. 1.

Introduction
Recovering 3D human body conﬁgurations from monoc-ular RGB images has broad applications in robotics, human-computer interaction, and human behaviour analy-sis. This is a challenging task, as the inherent depth ambi-guity under-constrains the reconstruction problem. To al-leviate the high dimensionality of the reconstruction space, deformable body models such as SMPL [54] or GHUM [82] have been used widely to represent a 3D human body in terms of body pose and shape parameters. Building upon these parametric models with the aid of deep learning, model-based methods have made promising progress on existing benchmarks [60, 38, 44, 35, 15, 49, 51, 45, 43].
However, obtaining 3D annotations for training deep mod-els often requires a Motion Capture (MoCap) system [73], which is cumbersome, expensive, and limited to speciﬁc environments and subjects. Moreover, labeling noise can be introduced when obtaining the 3D annotations by ﬁtting parametric models to sparse 3D MoCap markers [53, 55] or generating pseudo-labels using existing reconstruction models [37, 57, 50]. Thus it is important to reduce the de-pendency on 3D annotations to the greatest possible extent.
One approach is to employ weak supervisions, such as utilizing 2D landmark annotations combined with prior knowledge of constraints on human body pose and shape that are extracted from data [9, 38, 59, 29, 90, 94, 17, 27, 85]. While this method avoids the demand for 3D annota-tions, this problem is replaced by another: it is challeng-ing to collect a sufﬁciently homogeneous and dense data set from which to extract a precise prior [32]. Moreover, such data-driven priors do not explicitly capture reconstruc-tion plausibility, as they are only modeled via a black-box distribution. In this work, we avoid data-driven priors by exploiting generic body constraints derived from well-established studies on human body structure and move-ments [28, 58, 80] to effectively utilize 2D annotations for 3D body reconstruction.
Another problematic aspect of existing approaches is that they typically combine images from multiple datasets for training, neglecting the subsequent problem of data noise and data imbalance.
In particular, data noise can stem from inconsistent joint deﬁnitions across different datasets [62] and the presence of low quality images [43, 84]. Data imbalance occurs because 3D datasets are rich in images from videos but suffer from diversity in subjects and actions, whereas 2D datasets are diverse in subjects, poses, and backgrounds but usually suffer from having few images per subject-pose-background combination. KNOWN deals with the problems of data noise and data imbalance by mod-eling uncertainty. Speciﬁcally, KNOWN employs a novel probabilistic framework that captures both aleatoric uncer-tainty (also called data uncertainty), which measures the inherent data noise, and epistemic uncertainty (also called model uncertainty), which reﬂects the lack of knowledge due to limited data [40, 47, 41]. KNOWN is trained using
NLL, which achieves robustness to data noise by adaptively assigning weights based on the captured uncertainty. Be-cause previous methods treat all the data samples equally, their performance suffers on the minority images (those that are distinct from the training data and have low data den-sity). KNOWN uses an uncertainty-guided reﬁnement strat-egy to improve model performance, particularly on these minorities.
In summary, our main contributions include:
• A systematic study of body knowledge and its encod-ing as generic constraints that allow training 3D body reconstruction models without requiring any 3D data;
• The ﬁrst 3D body reconstruction model that accounts for both aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty, thereby supporting both data noise and data density character-ization and model performance improvement;
• Extensive experiments that demonstrates improved re-construction accuracy over existing works. In particu-lar, KNOWN outperforms fully-supervised 3D recon-struction models on challenging minority test images. 2.