Abstract
Box-supervised instance segmentation has gained much attention as it requires only simple box annotations instead of costly mask or polygon annotations. However, exist-ing box-supervised instance segmentation models mainly focus on mask-based frameworks. We propose a new end-to-end training technique, termed BoxSnake, to achieve ef-fective polygonal instance segmentation using only box an-notations for the ﬁrst time. Our method consists of two loss functions: (1) a point-based unary loss that constrains the bounding box of predicted polygons to achieve coarse-grained segmentation; and (2) a distance-aware pairwise loss that encourages the predicted polygons to ﬁt the ob-ject boundaries. Compared with the mask-based weakly-supervised methods, BoxSnake further reduces the perfor-mance gap between the predicted segmentation and the bounding box, and shows signiﬁcant superiority on the
Cityscapes dataset. The source code has been available at https://github.com/Yangr116/BoxSnake. 1.

Introduction
Instance segmentation aims to provide precious and
ﬁne-grained object localization, which plays a fundamen-tal role in various tasks, such as image understanding, au-tonomous driving, and robotic grasping. There are two pri-mary paradigms for advanced instance segmentation: mask-based [26, 6, 12, 66, 71, 80, 40] and polygon-based [41, 72, 37, 81, 54]. Mask-based instance segmentation employs pixel-wise masks to represent the objects of interest, while polygon-based instance segmentation utilizes object con-tours, consisting of a set of vertices along the object bound-aries [41, 37, 54] or a center point with a group of rays [72].
Nevertheless, the laborious and costly process of mask or polygon annotation [34, 19, 4] impedes the widespread and universal real-world applications of these methods.
Recent research efforts [15, 34, 28, 67, 39] aim to overcome this obstacle by obtaining instance masks solely
*Equal contribution. ‡ Work done during an internship at Tencent.
†Corresponding author.
Input
Output
Point Unary
Local Pairwise
Global Pairwise
Image Flow
Sup. Flow (box only)
Figure 1. BoxSnake is a box-supervised instance segmentation model that predicts the segmentation of the interested object in the form of polygons. Three terms, involving a point-based unary term and two pairwise terms, are proposed to constrain the predicted polygon to ﬁt the object boundary. The grey dotted line indicates that the proposed losses only work during training. through box annotations.
For example, BoxSup [15] and Box2Seg [34] employ pseudo mask labels from
GrabCut [56] or MCG [3] to train the networks itera-tively. BBTP [28] and BoxInst [67] propose an end-to-end mask-based framework utilizing multi-instance learn-ing (MIL) and pairwise afﬁnity modeling. Additionally,
BoxLevelSet [39] uses the Chan-Vese level-set energy func-tion [10] to predict instance-aware mask maps as an implicit level-set evolution. However, there is no deep-learning-based method for weakly-supervised polygonal instance segmentation. Therefore, we attempt to explore a new per-spective: Can effective polygon-based instance segmenta-tion be achieved with box annotations only?
To achieve it, we propose a new end-to-end training tech-nique, termed BoxSnake, with a point-based unary loss and a distance-aware pairwise loss. First, similar to the mask-based methods [15, 67, 39], we argue that all vertices of the expected polygon ought to be tightly enclosed by the bound-ing box. Thus, we design a point-based unary loss relying on CIoU [83] to constrain the bounding box of the predicted
polygon by maximizing its Intersection-over-Union (IoU) with the annotation box. As shown in Figure 2 (b), since the point-based unary loss only optimizes the outermost ver-tices of the predicted polygon, it can roughly regress to the object of interest but is hard to ﬁt the boundary well.
To address the above issue, we further introduce a pair-wise loss based on distance transformation, including a lo-cal pairwise term and a global pairwise term. Speciﬁcally, as shown in Figure 1, motivated by the weakly-supervised methods based on masks [28, 67, 39], we propose a local-pairwise loss to encourage the predicted polygon not to fall into ﬂat areas. However, compared with mask-based meth-ods, it is difﬁcult to directly optimize the coordinates of polygon vertices. Therefore, we attempt to convert the coor-dinate regression problem into a classiﬁcation problem. To approach this, we introduce a hard mapping function based on the curve evolution method [8, 52] to transform the 2D polygon into a 3D plane, which maps the pixels in the inte-rior and exterior of the polygon to two separated level sets.
We further use the distance transformation from pixels to predicted polygons to relax the discrete process in the map-ping function, enabling end-to-end training of the network.
Based on it, the local-pairwise loss encourages the consis-tency between neighboring pixels in a local window, ensur-ing that two nearby pixels in the 3D planes are likely to appear on the same level set if they have similar colors. In addition, we further propose a global-pairwise loss to mini-mize the variance of pixel colors in the same level set, which can better ﬁt the predicted polygon to the object boundary.
Besides, it makes the predicted polygon more smooth and more robust to the noise in a local region of the image.
In summary, our contributions lie in the following:
• We design a novel end-to-end training technique to ap-proach polygonal instance segmentation with only box supervision for the ﬁrst time.
• We introduce a point-based unary loss that regularizes the predicted polygon to objects using box-based IoU.
• We propose a distanced-based pairwise loss involving lo-cal and global terms to encourage the predicted polygon to align with object boundaries. More importantly, we devise a method that transforms the polygon regression problem into a classiﬁcation problem, thereby facilitating the pairwise loss on polygonal segmentation.
We apply the proposed techniques to the state-of-the-art polygon-based framework [37] and achieve competitive performance on COCO [43] and Cityscapes [14] datasets.
Compared with the mask-based weakly-supervised coun-terparts, our method can further narrow the performance gap between the predicted segmentation and the bound-ing box.With ResNet-50 backbone, our method obtains 3.9% absolute gains over the BoxInst [67] on Cityscapes dataset and shows signiﬁcant superiority over some fully-supervised methods on COCO dataset, including Deep-(a) image (b) w/ (cid:2278)(cid:3048) (c) w/ (cid:2278)(cid:3048)(cid:481) (cid:2278)(cid:3039)(cid:3043) and (cid:2278)(cid:3034)(cid:3043)
Figure 2.
Impacts of the different losses. (a) indicates the initial polygon sampled from an ellipse enclosed by the predicted box. (b) denotes the predicted polygon supervised by the point-based unary loss only. (c) is the predicted polygon jointly supervised by the point-based unary loss and the distance-aware pairwise loss.
Snake [54] and PolarMask [72]. 2.