Abstract
In this paper, we focus on the mural-restoration task, which aims to detect damaged regions in the mural and re-paint them automatically. Different from traditional image restoration tasks like in/out/blind-painting and image reno-vation, the corrupted mural suffers from more complicated degradation. However, existing mural-restoration methods and datasets still focus on simple degradation like masking.
Such a significant gap prevents mural-restoration from be-ing applied to real scenarios. To fill this gap, in this work, we propose a systematic framework to simulate the physi-cal process for damaged murals and provide a new bench-mark dataset for mural-restoration. Limited by the simpli-fication of the data synthesis process, the previous mural-restoration methods suffer from poor performance in our proposed dataset. To handle this problem, we propose the
Attention Diffusion Framework (ADF) for this challeng-ing task. Within the framework, a damage attention map module is proposed to estimate the damage extent. Facing the diversity of defects, we propose a series of loss functions to choose repair strategies adaptively. Finally, experimental results support the effectiveness of the proposed framework in terms of both mural synthesis and restoration. 1.

Introduction
As an art form of recording ancient civilization’s cul-ture, murals describe people’s life scenes and society’s land-scape, which have great scientific, historical, and artistic
*Corresponding authors.
Figure 1: The disruption and restoration of murals. We propose an simulation framework to generate a damaged mural image (top) and a restoration method to restore the corrupted image (bottom). significance [54, 49]. However, with constant exposure to the terrible environment, ancient murals are inevitably destroyed by light, winds, bacteria, and human activities
[30, 45]. According to the digital report of [30], manu-ally restoring murals is still the primary restoration mode.
This method is time-consuming due to large areas of miss-ing content caused by wall peeling and color decay. Hence, it is necessary to design a mural restoration algorithm to ac-curately repair the structured and unstructured defects [45].
Prior to the deep learning era, researchers attempted to design geometry-based or patch-based methods to detect
peeling, wearing). On top of this, we propose the first framework to generate realistic damaged murals with 3D open-source software blender 1. The proposed frame-work can not only simulate the random noisy on the mural surface but also the destruction process of its carrier through the transformation of the mural 3D model.
For challenge (2), limited by existing mural datasets, cur-rent algorithms may be biased toward ideal conditions and cannot handle real-world images. Therefore, in this work, we propose a diffusion-based model as a baseline for our dataset, namely Attention Diffusion Framework (ADF) to restore the damaged mural image. Moreover, we propose a lightweight module called Damage Attention Map (DAM) to predict the damage extent, the core of which is an atten-tion block to adaptive adjust the receptive field.
For challenge (3), a series of loss functions are proposed to form a comprehensive training target. Combined with the damage attention map, these losses can repair the missing information while preserving the basic structure and style of the input image.
In a nutshell, the main contributions are as follows:
• We propose a novel pipeline to generate damaged mu-rals for mural-restoration, which is more consistent with the real physical process. On top of this, we pro-vide a new mural-restoration benchmark dataset.
• According to the characteristic of mural-restoration, we propose a restoration framework based on a gener-ative diffusion model, whose core components include a damage attention map module and a series of losses.
• Extensive experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework. 2.