Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) has recently demon-strated great success in medical image segmentation, sig-nificantly enhancing data efficiency with limited annota-tions. However, despite its empirical benefits, there are still concerns in the literature about the theoretical foun-dation and explanation of semi-supervised segmentation.
To explore this problem, this study first proposes a novel causal diagram to provide a theoretical foundation for the mainstream semi-supervised segmentation methods. Our causal diagram takes two additional intermediate variables into account, which are neglected in previous work. Draw-ing from this proposed causal diagram, we then introduce a causality-inspired SSL approach on top of co-training frameworks called CauSSL, to improve SSL for medical im-age segmentation. Specifically, we first point out the impor-tance of algorithmic independence between two networks or branches in SSL, which is often overlooked in the lit-erature. We then propose a novel statistical quantification of the uncomputable algorithmic independence and further enhance the independence via a min-max optimization pro-cess. Our method can be flexibly incorporated into different existing SSL methods to improve their performance. Our method has been evaluated on three challenging medical image segmentation tasks using both 2D and 3D network architectures and has shown consistent improvements over state-of-the-art methods. Our code is publicly available at: https://github.com/JuzhengMiao/CauSSL. 1.

Introduction
Data-driven deep learning methods have shown remark-able performance in medical image segmentation [18, 38].
*Corresponding author.
Figure 1. Previous causal diagram for medical image segmenta-tion. The cause is the input image (X), based on which experts give the corresponding effect, i.e. segmentation mask (Y ). The green arrow represents the prediction direction for the segmenta-tion network. ⊥ indicates algorithmic independence defined on two functions or distributions. According to ICM, unlabeled data can help improve the estimation of P (X) but fail to improve the network P (Y |X) since they are algorithmically independent.
However, they typically require a large number of high-quality labeled data, which is extremely costly and diffi-cult to obtain for the pixel-wise annotations of medical im-ages requiring domain expertise. To solve this problem, semi-supervised learning (SSL) has become more and more popular and achieved remarkable success in medical image segmentation with limited annotations and large amounts of unlabeled data [1, 14, 25, 55]. Current semi-supervised segmentation methods can be mainly divided into two cat-egories. The first one is self-training or pseudo-labeling methods [1, 14], which utilize pseudo-labels as supervision for unlabeled images. The other mainstream SSL methods are based on consistency regularization. These methods ap-ply consistency regularization on the predictions between different models or branches based on the popular Mean
Teacher (MT) [25, 55] or co-training [36, 52] frameworks.
Although many works have demonstrated the success
of SSL methods on medical image segmentation tasks,
K¨ugelgen et al. [23] argue that semi-supervised segmen-tation should be expected ineffective based on the princi-ple of independent causal mechanisms (ICM) [13, 35, 42].
ICM claims that the causal generative process consists of in-dependent mechanisms that do not share information with each other. Fig. 1 depicts the causal diagram of the an-notation generation process for medical image segmenta-tion following [9].
In this process, experts manually de-lineate the corresponding segmentation mask for a given medical image based on visual inspection of the image con-tent and intensity contrast. As a result, the image X is the cause, while the annotation Y is the effect [9]. According to
ICM, for a causal prediction task, i.e., X → Y , the image generation process P (X) should be algorithmically inde-pendent with respect to the annotation generation process
P (Y |X).
In this regard, adding unlabeled data can pro-vide more knowledge about the data generation mechanism
P (X), but brings no helpful information about P (Y |X), parameterized by the segmentation network since there is no link between them. This challenges the theoretical ex-planation of the success in SSL segmentation.
To address this issue, we propose a new causal dia-gram (see Fig. 2) by introducing two intermediate nodes which can provide a better explanation for the mainstream semi-supervised segmentation methods. These intermedi-ate nodes denote pseudo-labels or predictions of another network/branch to assist the network learning on unlabeled data which are common in current SSL methods but are ne-glected in Fig. 1. The detailed analysis can be found in Sec-tion 3. Based on the new diagram, we further demonstrate that the algorithmic independence in a co-training frame-work can be even beneficial to the segmentation perfor-mance. However, the formalized measurement of the algo-rithmic independence, i.e., Kolmogorov complexity, is not computable, and proxies are often used in specific appli-cations, such as the minimum description length for NLP tasks [19]. Nonetheless, a proxy for segmentation networks
In this work, we propose a has not yet been explored. novel statistical quantification of the algorithmic indepen-dence specialized for deep convolutional networks, based on which, we design a min-max optimization process to fur-ther enhance the independence in co-training frameworks.
In summary, our main contributions are four-folds:
• This study proposes a novel causal diagram which is in compatibility with mainstream SSL methods in seg-mentation. The diagram sheds light on the effective-ness of semi-supervised segmentation from a causal perspective, and thus provides a theoretical founda-tion for understanding and further improving the per-formance of SSL in medical image segmentation.
• Based on our proposed causal diagram and ICM, we give comprehensive explanations of the limitations of the vanilla self-training and MT-based methods com-pared to co-training frameworks. This deepens the re-searchers’ understanding of the SSL framework from the viewpoint of algorithmic information and provides justifications for the significance of considering algo-rithmic independence for model learning.
• We propose a novel statistical quantification of the un-computable algorithmic independence, specialized for deep convolutional networks, named as network inde-pendence. This defines the algorithmic independence on the preservation of matrix ranks, treating the con-volution kernels as matrices. A min-max optimization framework is then utilized to enable end-to-end met-ric learning and validated on both co-training and MT-based learning scenarios.
• We evaluate our method with extensive experiments on three public medical image segmentation tasks by us-ing both 2D and 3D network architectures. The supe-rior performance of our method provides empirical ev-idence for the claim that semi-supervised medical im-age segmentation can be improved by causal-diagram-induced algorithmic independence. 2.