Abstract lack-box a
¯ eometric decision-based b
¯
Decision-based black-box attacks often necessitate a large number of queries to craft an adversarial exam-ple. Moreover, decision-based attacks based on querying boundary points in the estimated normal vector direction often suffer from inefficiency and convergence issues.
In urvature-this paper, we propose a novel query-efficient c
¯ ttack (CGBA) aware g
¯ that conducts boundary search along a semicircular path on a restricted 2D plane to ensure finding a boundary point successfully irrespective of the boundary curvature. While the proposed CGBA attack can work effectively for an ar-bitrary decision boundary, it is particularly efficient in ex-ploiting the low curvature to craft high-quality adversar-ial examples, which is widely seen and experimentally ver-ified in commonly used classifiers under non-targeted at-tacks.
In contrast, the decision boundaries often exhibit higher curvature under targeted attacks. Thus, we develop a new query-efficient variant, CGBA-H, that is adapted for the targeted attack. In addition, we further design an algo-rithm to obtain a better initial boundary point at the expense of some extra queries, which considerably enhances the performance of the targeted attack. Extensive experiments are conducted to evaluate the performance of our proposed methods against some well-known classifiers on the Ima-geNet and CIFAR10 datasets, demonstrating the superiority of CGBA and CGBA-H over state-of-the-art non-targeted and targeted attacks, respectively. The source code is avail-able at https://github.com/Farhamdur/CGBA. 1.

Introduction
Adversarial attacks are broadly classified into two types: white-box and black-box attacks. In the white-box attack setting [12, 23, 3], the adversary possesses the full knowl-edge of the target classifier and its weights. However, it is often impractical to avail information about the target classifier in real-world scenarios. Therefore, the black-box setting—transfer-based, score-based, and decision-based—is the practical setting for adversarial attacks with limited knowledge of the classifier. The transfer-based ad-versarial attacks [25, 29] use a surrogate model to generate adversarial examples though it does not guarantee a high attack success rate. Score-based attacks [6, 15] query the target classifier for the prediction probabilities of all the classes in order to estimate the gradient in each step and lessen perturbation. However, this attacking strategy may not be feasible because, in many real-world applications, classifiers only return the top-1 classification label in re-sponse to a query. Thus, the decision-based adversarial at-tack is the most practical adversarial attack as it allows the adversary to craft an adversarial example by only querying the top-1 classification label from the target classifier.
Most state-of-the-art decision-based attacks, such as
HSJA [5], qFool [19], GeoDA [26], QEBA [17] and
TA [20], are based on finding the normal vector at a point on the decision boundary and iteratively search for new boundary points with reduced perturbation. Among these attacks, HSJA [5], qFool (targeted) [19], QEBA [17], and
TA [20] employ the estimated normal vector direction to obtain a point inside the adversarial region, and then apply binary search between the obtained adversarial point and the source to get a new boundary point. The aforementioned approaches, however, do not explicitly take into account the geometry of the boundary when coining adversarial exam-ples. qFool (non-targeted) [19] and GeoDA [26], on the other hand, approximate the boundary as a hyperplane and earch find a new boundary point by conducting a b
¯ ector (BSNV). along the direction of the estimated n
¯
As further discussed below, while BSNV is effective for low-curvature boundaries where the linear approximation is sufficiently accurate, its effectiveness deteriorates as cur-vature and nonlinearity increase. For a boundary with high curvature, BSNV may not even hit the boundary due to the narrow adversarial region. SurFree [22] also considers a hyperplane boundary and conducts boundary search along a semicircular path, but it does not utilize the information of the normal vector and instead estimates the attack direction through random trials. ormal v
¯ inary s
¯
A careful examination of the above normal vector based attacks reveals the following limitations. The estimation of the normal vector may be inaccurate due to the limited query budget and the non-linearity of the boundary. Thus, the expected reduction in perturbation may not occur when searching along the direction of the estimated normal vec-tor. Moreover, if the adversarial region is narrow enough, the search process does not converge towards perturbation reduction due to the inability to find the adversarial region in the search direction. Fundamentally, these limitations are related to the one-dimensional (1-D) search nature dictated by the estimated normal vector. The state-of-the-art (SOTA) non-targeted attack SurFree, on the other hand, queries an adversarial point along a semicircular path but does not use the critical normal vector information to estimate the attack direction. Motivated by the above observation, we propose a new curvature-aware geometric black-box attack (CGBA) in this work to further improve the attack efficiency. Par-ticularly, rather than conducting a boundary point search towards the estimated normal direction or along a semicir-cular path in some random direction, CGBA conducts the boundary point search along a semicircular path (BSSP) in a restricted 2-D plane spanned by two vectors: the direction towards a boundary point from the source (i.e., ˆvt in Fig-ure 1) and the estimated normal direction on that boundary point (i.e., ˆηt in Figure 1). As further illustrated in Sec-tion 4 and Appendix D, the proposed CGBA overcomes the limitations of 1D boundary search and is a query-efficient approach for low curvature boundaries. However, it grad-ually loses query efficiency as the curvature of the bound-ary increases. Thus, we modify CGBA to CGBA-H which follows the same restricted 2D semicircular path but more swiftly adapts to the high curvature of the decision bound-ary. Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose CGBA, a novel iterative decision-based black-box attack that conducts boundary search along a semicircular path on a restricted 2-D plane and ef-fectively overcomes the limitations of existing 1-D search based on estimated normal vectors at the de-cision boundary.
• The proposed CGBA attack can effectively exploit the decision boundary’s low curvature for non-targeted at-tacks. When the decision boundary assumes a high curvature, we develop a new variant, CGBA-H, which achieves better performance for targeted attacks.
• Moreover, we introduce an algorithm to choose a bet-ter initial boundary point and demonstrate that this ini-tialization method leads to significant performance im-provement for the targeted attack.
• Experimental results on ImageNet and CIFAR10 re-veal the efficacy of CGBA and CGBA-H for non-targeted and targeted attacks, respectively. 2.