Abstract
Understanding and analyzing human behaviors (actions and interactions of people), voices, and sounds in chaotic events is crucial in many applications, e.g., crowd manage-ment, emergency response services. Different from human behaviors in daily life, human behaviors in chaotic events are generally different in how they behave and influence others, and hence are often much more complex. How-ever, currently there is lack of a large video dataset for analyzing human behaviors in chaotic situations. To this end, we create the first large and challenging multi-modal dataset, Chaotic World, that simultaneously provides dif-ferent levels of fine-grained and dense spatio-temporal an-notations of sounds, individual actions and group interac-tion graphs, and even text descriptions for each scene in each video, thereby enabling a thorough analysis of com-plicated behaviors in crowds and chaos. Our dataset con-sists of a total of 299,923 annotated instances for detect-ing human behaviors for Spatiotemporal Action Localiza-tion in chaotic events, 224,275 instances for identifying interactions between people for Behavior Graph Analy-sis in chaotic events, 336,390 instances for localizing rel-evant scenes of interest in long videos for Spatiotempo-ral Event Grounding, and 378,093 instances for triangu-lating the source of sound for Event Sound Source Local-ization. Given the practical complexity and challenges in chaotic events (e.g., large crowds, serious occlusions, com-plicated interaction patterns), our dataset shall be able to facilitate the community to develop, adapt, and eval-uate various types of advanced models for analyzing hu-man behaviors in chaotic events. We also design a sim-ple yet effective IntelliCare model with a Dynamic Knowl-edge Pathfinder module that intelligently learns from multi-ple tasks and can analyze various aspects of a chaotic scene in a unified architecture. This method achieves promising results in experiments. Dataset and code can be found at https://github.com/sutdcv/Chaotic-World. 1.

Introduction
Chaotic situations can occur in many scenarios, often arising on the onset or aftermath of natural disasters or
‡
Equal contributions. * Corresponding author. human-caused incidents such as accidents, crowd crush, crimes, or protests. How people behave, interact, and in-fluence others in chaotic events can be very different from those in peaceful daily life situations (e.g., [33, 54, 20, 11]), and are generally much more complex [43]. Also, the num-ber of people in such scenarios can vary from a few indi-viduals to crowd of thousands, and how they interact with one another is complex, which warrants detailed analysis of the situation before they evolve to become major public safety and security concerns, and subsequently resulting in damages to properties, injuries, or even death [31]. Even a peaceful or joyous event can suddenly turn chaotic [31] such as the recent unfortunate Itaewon crowd crush [56].
Ensuring public safety and order has become challeng-ing, and costs the world at least USD$13.6 trillion each year [15, 16]. The probability of chaotic events occurring is likely to increase with the increased number of natural dis-asters due to climate change [66, 63], protests (which have tripled in the past 15 years) [42] and violence occurrences
[15, 16] etc. Hence, the ability to closely monitor and ac-curately detect such sudden onset of chaotic situations and potential accidents; rapidly analyze (especially critical dur-ing time-sensitive emergencies) humans, their actions and interactions with others; intelligently acquire vital informa-tion about the chaotic scene; and then swiftly deploy hu-manitarian aid [68, 1] has become even more important than ever, and can tremendously minimize casualties and dam-ages [25, 61]. This area of research has also attracted greater attention over the years [68, 50, 1, 70, 73, 8, 74, 31].
Besides being extremely critical for public safety [5], understanding and analyzing human behaviors in chaotic events are also significant in many applications [21, 67, 61, 8] such as the following: Firstly, event organisers, intelligence services, and emergency services can utilize the insights to intelligently deploy smart assistant systems, plan safe evacuation route, manage and control crowds
[67, 61, 8]. Secondly, urban space designers can likewise design safer and better spaces [8]. Thirdly, psychologists, criminologists, and social behavioral scientists can learn about the complex human interactions in chaotic situations, so as to develop effective strategies to mitigate or handle chaotic situations or post-chaos trauma [5]. Lastly, content
providers or film regulators can automatically identify and tag scenes that may be uncomfortable to viewers (e.g., vio-lence) and provide appropriate content rating guidance [6].
Considering that chaotic scenes are often dynamic (and often with serious occlusions) and complex (including ac-tions of individuals and interactions between individuals), analyzing human behaviors and interactions in such scenes while taking in account the different data modalities is currently challenging, and especially so for humans to screen through large volume of social media or surveillance footages with multiple views of the scene [1, 68], and often a large part of these footages may not contain the chaotic scene of interest [31]. Furthermore, given that many peo-ple can appear in the same frame in the chaotic scene, with each person performing one or more actions [10], and fur-ther compounded by the fact that actions can occur and change within split seconds, localizing relevant temporal segments and human behaviors becomes even more chal-lenging. Thus, there is a demand to develop intelligent au-tomated systems to analyze human behaviors and interac-tions in chaotic scenes, and pre-empt potential escalation in crowd tension or threats to public safety [5, 39, 31], thereby minimizing possible damage or casualty through alerts or mitigatory measures.
Before analyzing a chaotic situation, one would first be concerned about identifying the relevant chaotic scene or person of interest in long video streams, and this can be ex-pedited by Spatiotemporal Event Grounding (Fig. 5). Next, identifying each individual’s action is important (e.g., un-covering intentions), and therefore there is a need to localize them through Spatiotemporal Action Localization (Fig. 3).
Besides actions, analyzing sound can also be important as a sound (e.g., explosion going off) or voice can affect the actions of one or many (e.g., causing the crowd to scamper and leading to even more chaos). Thus, it is crucial to lo-cate the source of sound in such a chaotic scene using Event
Sound Source Localization (Fig. 6). On top of these, the ac-tion of a person can also affect the trajectories and actions of many people (e.g., person shouting “Bomb” can cause the crowd to scamper or duck to the ground). Hence, ana-lyzing the complex graph of one’s interactions with others through Behavior Graph Analysis (Fig. 4) is crucial for one to understand relationships (e.g., accomplices), sense crowd dynamics, detect changes in human behaviors, and analyze trends and development of the fluid chaotic situation. All of these tasks are crucial for analyzing human behaviors in chaotic situations, and it is also important to have a large and comprehensive dataset to develop, adapt, and evaluate deep learning models [24, 33].
Unfortunately, there is lack of a large video dataset that comprehensively analyzes human behaviors in chaotic events [31], thereby stifling deeper research and prospect of bringing much needed benefits to this underserved domain.
Motivated by this, we create Chaotic World, the first large and challenging multi-modal video dataset for ana-lyzing different dimensions of a scene for holistic and de-tailed analysis of human behaviors in chaotic situations — from high-level information on the (1) type of chaotic situ-ations, ranging from natural disasters (e.g., earthquakes) to human-caused incidents (e.g., accidents, crimes, protests) in different parts of the world, to mid-level details of the (2) complex interaction graph among individuals for Behavior
Graph Analysis, and down to low-level details of (3) actions of individuals for Spatiotemporal Action Localization, and even (4) sound and voice for Event Sound Source Localiza-tion. Our dataset also contains (5) descriptions of people in scenes-of-interest that can be used to identify the rele-vant segment in long video streams through Spatiotemporal
Event Grounding (Fig. 5). Our Chaotic World dataset pos-sesses challenges with complex scenes of chaotic scenar-ios with crowds (up to 50 people in one frame) and serious occlusions, dynamic background (e.g., moving objects in a flood) and motion blur (e.g., camera shake during earth-quake). There are also new, unique, and complex action and interaction patterns that are unique in chaotic scenar-ios (e.g., postures and trajectories of someone walking in an earthquake that are not seen in normal situations). Also, the interactions among many people in chaotic scenarios form distinct and very complex chaotic patterns and large interac-tion graphs that differ significantly from everyday activities, because one person can affect many others, many may also affect one, and many can affect many in such scenarios, thus forming complicated graphs of actions, interactions, and sounds (Fig. 1) that are seldom handled in previous datasets.
With the rich annotations, our challenging dataset shall be able to attract and facilitate the community to develop, train, and evaluate various types of advanced methods for analyzing human behaviors in chaotic situations, and take advantage of highly correlated multi-modal information to assist the model in learning complex patterns associated with chaotic events so as to obtain detailed holistic anal-ysis of human behaviors in chaotic events, thereby expe-diting the rate in which such research is conducted to ben-efit a wide range of future applications. We also present an effective IntelliCare model with a Dynamic Knowledge
Pathfinder module that intelligently learns from multiple tasks and can analyze various aspects of a chaotic scene in a unified architecture to facilitate a more thorough under-standing and analysis of human behaviors in chaotic events. 2.