Abstract
Multi-object tracking (MOT) at low frame rates can re-duce computational, storage and power overhead to bet-ter meet the constraints of edge devices. Many existing
MOT methods suffer from significant performance degra-dation in low-frame-rate videos due to significant location and appearance changes between adjacent frames. To this end, we propose to explore collaborative tracking learn-ing (ColTrack) for frame-rate-insensitive MOT in a query-based end-to-end manner. Multiple historical queries of the same target jointly track it with richer temporal de-scriptions. Meanwhile, we insert an information refine-ment module between every two temporal blocking de-coders to better fuse temporal clues and refine features.
Moreover, a tracking object consistency loss is proposed to guide the interaction between historical queries. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that in high-frame-rate videos, ColTrack obtains higher performance than state-of-the-art methods on large-scale datasets Dancetrack and
BDD100K, and outperforms the existing end-to-end meth-ods on MOT17. More importantly, ColTrack has a sig-nificant advantage over state-of-the-art methods in low-frame-rate videos, which allows it to obtain faster pro-cessing speeds by reducing frame-rate requirements while maintaining higher performance. Code will be released at https://github.com/yolomax/ColTrack 1.

Introduction
The goal of multi-object tracking (MOT) is to esti-mate bounding boxes and identities of objects of interest in videos. In high-frame-rate videos, the velocities of ob-jects are slow, which makes the difference between adjacent frames small. State-of-the-art MOT methods [2, 28, 24, 34, 33, 37, 16, 30] achieve impressive results in the high-frame-rate situation. However, limited by storage, computing, and network bandwidth, low-frame-rate videos are very com-*First Author and Second Author contribute equally to this work.
Figure 1. The comparison of the computing time for different methods to achieve the required HOTA score when tracking in a one-second video. These data are calculated based on the HOTA score and FPS of different methods on the MOT17 validation set.
ColTrack still maintains high HOTA scores when tracking at low frame rates, so it achieves faster tracking speed by reducing the frame rate requirement while ensuring a high HOTA score. mon. In low-frame-rate videos, the difference between ad-jacent frames is larger, which degrades the performance of existing methods.
The challenges caused by low-frame-rate videos are manifold. First, the displacements of objects between ad-jacent frames become larger, which even leads to no over-lapping of the object boxes. This requires the model to match targets over a larger range, which includes more noisy objects. Furthermore, the position estimation error of the motion model (e.g. the Kalman filter [14]) is ampli-fied and leads to significant performance degradation of the
Kalman filter-based methods, e.g., Bytetrack [33] and Fair-MOT [34]. Second, objects have severe appearance changes between adjacent frames. The viewpoints, visibilities, and poses of the objects change greatly. In addition, the sudden occlusion causes the objects to lose key appearance features rapidly. This greatly challenges some methods [34, 24] that rely on appearance features.
Some methods focusing on the detection of emerging ob-jects [36] or the adjustment of training strategies [12] are proposed to improve the MOT performance at low frame
rates, while these methods do not fundamentally solve the problems of unreliable features and large displacements in low-frame-rate videos. The end-to-end MOT meth-ods [16, 30] use the deformable attention-based DETR-like detection model [8, 39] to match objects in the current frame based on the queries from the last frame. The utilization of deformable attention allows the model to adaptively find targets in a larger range. This helps to alleviate the problem caused by the large displacements. However, the matching of objects in this way heavily depends on the quality of the queries, which cannot be guaranteed due to the unreliable features in low-frame-rate videos.
In this paper, we propose collaborative tracking learn-ing (ColTrack) for frame-rate-insensitive MOT, which is an end-to-end MOT approach. ColTrack utilizes multiple historical queries belonging to the same object as the col-laborative tracking queries to track the same target. These queries contain descriptions of the same target at different moments. Their combination effectively alleviates the im-pact of unreliable features. However, the introduction of multiple historical queries to track the same target is against the one-to-one matching strategy of the DETR-like detec-tion architecture. This causes the model to not only lose the capability of inhibiting duplicate predictions, but also fail to train with the bipartite matching loss [8].
To address these issues, we propose an information re-finement module (IRM) and insert it between every two temporal blocking decoders to enable the information fu-sion between collaborative tracking queries while retaining the capability of inhibiting duplicate predictions. IRM con-tains an information removal branch and an information ad-dition branch to assist queries to decide how to refine them-selves based on temporal clues. Furthermore, we propose a tracking object consistency loss (TOCLoss), which requires each tracking query to collect discriminative features from other historical queries for the correct tracking. The joint use of these modules enables ColTrack to achieve more sta-ble performance at low frame rates and better track difficult targets at high frame rates.
As shown in Fig. 1, ColTrack further increases the pro-cessing speed of the video by reducing the frame rate re-quirement while ensuring higher accuracy. In contrast, ex-isting methods [33, 34, 30] require higher frame rates to achieve high accuracy, which results in more video frames being processed and lower processing speed.
To summarize, our contributions are as follows:
• We propose a query-based end-to-end model ColTrack that uses the collaborative tracking of multiple histor-ical queries to achieve stable performance even at low frame rates.
• We further devise a IRM module to allow each query to better fuse information based on temporal cues. The proposed TOCLoss guides queries to collect valuable clues from other historical queries.
• ColTrack not only outperforms state-of-the-art meth-ods on large-scale datasets under high frame rates but also achieves higher and more stable performance un-der low frame rates. This allows it to obtain a higher equivalent FPS by reducing the frame rate require-ment. 2.