Abstract
This paper studies the problem of recovering cameras from a set of fundamental matrices. A set of fundamental matrices is said to be compatible if a set of cameras exists for which they are the fundamental matrices. We focus on the complete graph, where fundamental matrices for each pair of cameras are given. Previous work has established necessary and sufficient conditions for compatibility as rank and eigenvalue conditions on the n-view fundamental ma-trix obtained by concatenating the individual fundamental matrices. In this work, we show that the eigenvalue condi-tion is redundant in the generic and collinear cases. We pro-vide explicit homogeneous polynomials that describe neces-sary and sufficient conditions for compatibility in terms of the fundamental matrices and their epipoles. In this direc-tion, we find that quadruple-wise compatibility is enough to ensure global compatibility for any number of cameras. We demonstrate that for four cameras, compatibility is generi-cally described by triple-wise conditions and one additional equation involving all fundamental matrices.

Introduction
The problem of finding camera matrices that corre-spond to a given set of fundamental matrices is crucial in 3D reconstructions from 2D images. Typically, multiview structure-from-motion pipelines start by estimating funda-mental matrices from point correspondences, with early methods for such estimations dating back to the 1990s and new methods still being developed today [21, 25, 26, 29].
However, these methods usually only estimate a subset of all possible fundamental matrices between cameras. To de-scribe this incomplete set of fundamental matrices, viewing graphs are often used [17].
In this paper, we focus on understanding the conditions under which a reconstruction of n cameras can be obtained (cid:1) fundamental matrices, given complete knowledge of (cid:0)n but we also give a result for general graphs at the end.
Here, a camera refers to a full-rank 3 × 4 matrix, and the 2 fundamental matrix of two cameras P1 and P2 with distinct kernels is a 3 × 3 rank-2 matrix that encodes all point cor-respondences between them. For any given rank-2 3 × 3 matrix F 12, there exists a pair of cameras P1 and P2 for which F 12 is the fundamental matrix, this pair is unique up to global projective transformation. However, for a set of (cid:1) rank-2 3 × 3 matrices F ij, where n > 2, it is not al-(cid:0)n 2 ways guaranteed that there exist cameras P1, . . . , Pn such that F ij is the fundamental matrix of Pi and Pj for each i, j. Following the notation of [12] we say that the set F ij is compatible if such cameras do exist. Note that some re-cent literature uses the term consistent instead [15].
Finding necessary and sufficient conditions for compati-bility of fundamental matrices has practical applications as well as theoretical ones. [15] proposes an algorithm for pro-jective structure-from-motion that employs their necessary and sufficient condition for compatibility. The algorithm is designed to handle collections of measured fundamental matrices, both complete and partial, and aims to find cam-era matrices that minimize a global algebraic error for the given set of matrices. As for theoretical purposes, [5, 6, 11] uses necessary and sufficient conditions for compatibility to give a classification of critical configurations.
In the case of n = 3, a classical result [12, Section 15.4] provides triple-wise constraints on F 12, F 13, F 23 in terms of the fundamental matrices and their epipoles, where the i-th epipole in the j-th image is defined as ei j := ker F ij. For non-collinear cameras, [15, Theorem 1] provides necessary and sufficient conditions for compatibility for any n. These conditions rely on the eigenvalues and rank of the n-view fundamental matrix, which is obtained by stacking all fun-damental matrices into a 3n × 3n matrix. In the follow-up work, [9, Theorem 2] arrives at a similar condition in the collinear case. Both methods rely on fixing a correct scal-ing of each matrix and are therefore not projectively well-defined, nor are the conditions expressed in terms of the fundamental matrices and their epipoles, as in the n = 3 case.
The contributions of this paper include giving explicit homogeneous polynomials that provide necessary and suf-ficient conditions for the compatibility of fundamental ma-trices in the case of complete graphs. This is done in Sec-tion 3. Specifically, for the case of n = 4, we establish that a set of six fundamental matrices admits a reconstruc-tion of camera matrices with linearly independent centers only if the triple-wise constraints and an additional poly-nomial equation involving all six fundamental matrices and their epipoles are satisfied. We also demonstrate, using the computer algebra system Macaulay2 [10], that the eigen-value conditions from [9, 15] are superfluous in the generic case and in the case where all epipoles in each image coin-cide. In Section 2 we introduce the fundamental action, a key tool in simplifying the problem of finding compatibil-ity conditions. Section 4 presents a necessary and sufficient condition for compatibility for any viewing graph via a cy-cle condition, similar to cycle-based formulations of paral-lel rigidity that appear in the calibrated case.
We approach compatibility of fundamental matrices from an algebraic point of view, i.e., we aim to describe con-straints through algebraic equations and polynomial equa-tions using techniques and software from applied algebraic geometry. This approach to questions in computer vision has a long standing tradition [1, 7, 13, 16, 27].