Abstract
Recently, GAN has successfully contributed to mak-ing single-image super-resolution (SISR) methods produce more realistic images. However, natural images have com-plex distribution in the real world, and a single classi-fier in the discriminator may not have enough capacity to classify real and fake samples, making the preceding
SR network generate unpleasing noise and artifacts. To solve the problem, we propose a novel content-aware lo-cal GAN framework, CAL-GAN, which processes a large and complicated distribution of real-world images by di-viding them into smaller subsets based on similar contents.
Our mixture of classifiers (MoC) design allocates differ-ent super-resolved patches to corresponding expert clas-sifiers. Additionally, we introduce novel routing and or-thogonality loss terms so that different classifiers can han-dle various contents and learn separable features. By feeding similar distributions into the corresponding spe-cialized classifiers, CAL-GAN enhances the representa-tion power of existing super-resolution models, achiev-ing state-of-the-art perceptual performance on standard benchmarks and real-world images without modifying the generator-side architecture. The codes are available at https://github.com/jkpark0825/CAL GAN. 1.

Introduction
As one of the long-standing challenges in computer vi-sion, single image super-resolution (SISR, or SR in short) aims to reconstruct a super-resolved image ISR from its low-resolution (LR) counterpart ILR. While the inverse problem has multiple possible solutions for a given input due to the ill-posedness, the practical goal of SISR is to generate a per-ceptually favorable result from the LR input. To this end, earlier approaches [8, 24, 30] have constructed various net-work architectures specialized for SR and optimized pixel-wise L2 or L1 loss terms. Later, perceptual objective func-tions [22] and adversarial training frameworks [13, 26, 50] are introduced to generate more realistic textures and im-prove the realism of SR results. (a) Conventional global GANs (b) Conventional local GANs (c) Our CAL-GAN with mixture of classifiers (MoC)
Figure 1: Overall framework of our CAL-GAN. Unlike the ap-proaches mentioned in (a) and (b), our CAL-GAN in (c) groups local contents with similar properties and feeds them to their cor-responding specialized discriminators.
Previous perceptual SR methods jointly optimize the
SR network and discriminator through adversarial training, while the discriminator is responsible for distinguishing real and generated, i.e., fake, SR samples. However, as shown in
Figure 1a, the majority of methods [26, 50, 32, 57, 29, 48] adopt a global discriminator that is not specialized to con-sider the importance of local distribution in SR tasks. To improve local details, recent approaches [48, 51, 6] have in-corporated local discriminators, which aim to differentiate between each local texture in HR and SR. However, such discriminators are regarded as content-blind, indicating that they cannot learn the various properties of the local con-tent. Specifically, they na¨ıvely try to learn the whole dis-tributions from each local content using a single discrimi-nator, as shown in Figure 1b. Thus, they struggle to learn the complex distribution of natural images, resulting in sub-optimal solutions. As adversarial training benefits from
finding equilibrium between the generator and discrimina-tor, such a sub-optimality may negatively affect the gener-ator side. Also, in previous approaches, real and fake sam-ples are grouped without considering the diverse properties of different images. For example, separating real and fake tree images would be a nice training example for perceptual
SR models, whereas classifying fake tree and real sky may not provide informative gradients. Likewise, as shown in
Figure 1b, existing methods enforce the distribution of flow-ers, cups, and hair images to be learned with a single classi-fier. Therefore, existing perceptual SR methods [50, 45, 38] usually generate unpleasant artifacts in super-resolved im-ages.
One possible option to alleviate such limitations is to introduce semantic labels [49, 39, 52] to the discriminator side, assuming that patches in the same class have common characteristics. Nevertheless, even though samples from the same category may share specific properties, their low-level statistics can vary. For example, wheels, windows, and bon-nets are all labeled as a ‘car,’ but their contents differ sig-nificantly. Another practical issue is that determining the plausible number of semantic classes is infeasible. Natural images contain numerous types of objects, and sometimes it is not trivial to define an exact label, e.g., background, for all possible patches for learning.
To overcome the aforementioned challenges, we pro-pose Content-Aware Local GAN, CAL-GAN, a novel ad-versarial training framework for handling complicated nat-ural image distributions by their contents. Instead of using a single classifier to learn the complex manifold of natu-ral images, we divide it into smaller subsets according to image contents. As shown in Figure 1c, our mixture of classifiers (MoC) effectively handles much smaller mani-folds than previous approaches where features in each group share common properties. Furthermore, we propose an ef-ficient routing module and learning strategy to implicitly determine an appropriate subset of each feature rather than assigning them manually. Combined with orthogonal regu-larization [21, 54, 55] and LDA-based [36, 10] techniques, we can significantly improve the separability of the learned features for accurate distribution learning.
Our CAL-GAN is applicable to existing SR frame-works without modifications. Thus, we demonstrate that
CAL-GAN improves the performance of state-of-the-art SR methods [30, 50, 28] to reconstruct more photo-realistic re-sults on diverse benchmarks. Extensive ablation studies also validate that the design principle of CAL-GAN helps SR models to generate perceptually fine details and textures.
Our several-fold contributions can be organized as follows:
• We present a powerful adversarial training framework that utilizes multiple expertized classifiers. A proper patch-wise routing policy can be learned during train-ing with the proposed balancing loss.
• We adopt orthogonality constrain and distribution-based inter/intra-class loss terms to minimize correla-tion between different discriminators to implement an expert system.
• Our CAL-GAN achieves superior SR performance on various benchmarks and real-world images, achieving high perceptual metrics and visual quality. 2.