Abstract
We describe a method to parse a complex, cluttered in-door scene into primitives which offer a parsimonious ab-straction of scene structure. Our primitives are simple con-vexes. Our method uses a learned regression procedure to parse a scene into a fixed number of convexes from RGBD input, and can optionally accept segmentations to improve the decomposition. The result is then polished with a de-scent method which adjusts the convexes to produce a very good fit, and greedily removes superfluous primitives. Be-cause the entire scene is parsed, we can evaluate using traditional depth, normal, and segmentation error metrics.
Our evaluation procedure demonstrates that the error from our primitive representation is comparable to that of pre-dicting depth from a single image. 1.

Introduction
Primitive based abstractions of geometry offer simpler reasoning – it is easier, for example, to deal with a fridge as a cuboid than attend to the detailed curves around a cor-ner. But obtaining primitive representations that abstract usefully and accurately has been hard. Parsing isolated ob-jects into parts has seen considerable recent progress, but parsing indoor scenes into collections of primitives has re-mained difficult. We describe a method to decompose in-door scenes into convex primitives which largely describe the scene. Our method is trained on labeled RGBD + se-mantic segmentation maps, and the predicted decomposi-tion can be refined on depth + segmentation maps that are predicted from a suitable pretrained network.
Our method draws on a long history of fitting primitives to objects with two main methods (review Sec. 2). A de-scent method chooses primitives for a given geometry by minimizing a cost function. These methods are plagued by local minima and robustness issues. A regression method uses a learned predictor to map geometry to primitives and their parameters. These methods can pool examples to avoid local minima, but may not get the best prediction for a given input. Our method uses regression to predict an initial
Figure 1. Our method decomposes complex cluttered indoor scenes into simple geometric shapes. The segmentation itself is su-pervised from known labels, and the losses attempt to capture the geometric information in the depth map input with a pre-defined number of convexes. A convex decomposition predicted by a neu-ral network is the input to a refinement process that removes excess parts while improving the fit. Top row: Test RGB image, depth map input, ground truth normals. Bottom row: predicted seg-mentation, predicted depth map, predicted normals. Notice how strongly the predicted depth and normals match the ground truth.
Different from previous work, our method generally captures the whole input, allowing traditional depth and normal error metrics. decomposition, then applies descent to polish the primitives for each particular test geometry. We show that both steps are critical to achieving a good fit.
It can be hard to tell if a primitive based representation captures the abstraction one wants. But for a representation to be useful, it must have three necessary properties: 1. Accuracy: The primitives should represent the orig-inal geometry. As Section 4 demonstrates, we do not need to create metrics specifically for scene pars-ing and instead existing evaluation procedures from depth/segmentation prediction literature are sufficient. 2. Segmentation: Generally, the decomposition should
“make sense.” For isolated objects, this means that each primitive should correspond to an object part (which is difficult to evaluate). For scenes, this means that each primitive should span no more than one ob-ject. An object might be explained by multiple prim-itives, but a primitive should not explain multiple ob-jects. This property is not usually evaluated quantita-tively; we show that it can be. 3. Parsimony: In line with previous geometric decom-position work, we desire a representation with as few primitives as possible. In this work, we show that our method can vary the number of primitives per-scene by initially starting with a fixed number, and allowing a post-process to find and remove unnecessary convexes.
Our contributions are: 1. Our primitive decomposition method for indoor scenes is a simple procedure that works well on established and novel metrics on the benchmark NYUv2 dataset.
In particular, we are the first, to our knowledge, to eval-uate primitive decompositions using standard metrics for depth, normal, and segmentation. 2. We show our mixed strategy offers drastic advantages over either descent or regression methods in isolation.
The key insight is that convex fitting to noisy indoor scenes is extremely difficult via pure optimization, but very good start points can be generated via regression. 3. We are the first to use segmentation labels to drive primitive generation. 2.