Abstract
Medical image arbitrary-scale super-resolution (MI-ASSR) has recently gained widespread attention, aiming to supersample medical volumes at arbitrary scales via a single model. However, existing MIASSR methods face two major limitations: (i) reliance on high-resolution (HR) volumes and (ii) limited generalization ability, which re-stricts their applications in various scenarios. To over-come these limitations, we propose Cube-based Neural Ra-diance Field (CuNeRF), a zero-shot MIASSR framework that is able to yield medical images at arbitrary scales and free viewpoints in a continuous domain. Unlike exist-ing MISR methods that only fit the mapping between low-resolution (LR) and HR volumes, CuNeRF focuses on build-ing a continuous volumetric representation from each LR volume without the knowledge of the corresponding HR one. This is achieved by the proposed differentiable mod-ules: cube-based sampling, isotropic volume rendering, and cube-based hierarchical rendering. Through extensive ex-*Corresponding author. periments on magnetic resource imaging (MRI) and com-puted tomography (CT) modalities, we demonstrate that
CuNeRF can synthesize high-quality SR medical images, which outperforms state-of-the-art MISR methods, achiev-ing better visual verisimilitude and fewer objectionable ar-tifacts. Compared to existing MISR methods, our CuNeRF is more applicable in practice. 1.

Introduction
Medical imaging techniques such as computed tomogra-phy (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are criti-cal tools in assisting clinical diagnosis. However, the acqui-sition of high-quality medical slices is a resource-intensive process, which requires subjects to be exposed to consider-able ionizing radiations for a long time, increasing the life-time risk of cancer [21]. To reduce the burden on subjects, a feasible approach is to reconstruct high-resolution (HR) medical volumes from low-resolution (LR) ones.
To tackle medical image super-resolution (MISR) chal-lenges, early studies employed optimization methods [12,
Figure 2. Difference between existing supervised MISR (a), zero-shot MISR (ZSMISR) (b) and CuNeRF (c). Visually, supervised MISR methods need to collect considerable LR-HR pairs for training, while ZSMISR and our CuNeRF only train the model on each test volume itself. However, given a test volume, ZSMISR methods can only upsample medical images at a specific scale (one-for-one), while our
CuNeRF can handle arbitrary upsampling scales (one-for-all). 40] and interpolation methods [18]. Subsequently, a series of methods [8, 43, 47, 5, 36] have adopted convolutional neural networks to learn the LR-HR mappings. Recently, medical image arbitrary-scale super-resolution (MIASSR) methods [28, 41] have received widespread attention in the
MISR community, aiming to employ a single model to up-sample medical volumes at arbitrary scales. Although these methods achieve acceptable HR results, they still have two major issues: (i) Existing MIASSR methods rely on the su-pervision from HR volumes, yet high-quality HR volumes are not always available; (ii) These methods may be suscep-tible to the distribution gap between training and test data, producing non-existent details. These drawbacks limit the application scenarios of existing MIASSR methods.
To address the above-mentioned limitations, we present a zero-shot MIASSR framework – Cube-based NeRF (CuNeRF), which aims to yield arbitrary upsampling im-ages after training on a test LR volume itself (see Figure 2).
Specifically, we draw inspiration from the neural radiance field (NeRF) [23] to estimate the continuous volumetric rep-resentation from discrete samples (LR volumes) instead of fitting the mapping between LR and HR volumes. Since directly applying NeRF on medical volumes may result in grid-like artifacts (see Figure 3, detailed explanation is pro-vided in Section 4.1), our CuNeRF tackles such aliasing is-sues via the proposed differentiable modules: cube-based sampling, isotropic volume rendering, and cube-based hi-erarchical rendering. As shown in Figure 1, CuNeRF can build a continuous mapping between the coordinate and the corresponding intensity value in the training data, which is capable of generating medical slices at arbitrary scales and free viewpoints in a continuous domain. Comprehensive experiments on the MSD Brain Tumour (MRI) [33] and
KiTS19 (CT) [13] datasets show that CuNeRF yields im-pressive performance in 3D and volumetric MISR at various upsampling scales, outperforming state-of-the-art methods.
The main contributions are summarized:
• To the best of our knowledge, CuNeRF is the first zero-shot MIASSR framework that can continuously upsample medical volumes at arbitrary scales.
• We address the hole-forming issues via the proposed techniques: cube-based sampling, isotropic volume rendering, and cube-based hierarchical rendering.
• Extensive experiments on CT and MRI modalities for 3D MISR and volumetric MISR show CuNeRF favor-ably surpasses state-of-the-art MIASSR methods. 2.