Abstract t = ˆt t = ˆt + k
Multiple object tracking (MOT) is a fundamental compo-nent of perception systems for autonomous driving, and its robustness to unseen conditions is a requirement to avoid life-critical failures. Despite the urge of safety in driving systems, no solution to the MOT adaptation problem to do-main shift in test-time conditions has ever been proposed.
However, the nature of a MOT system is manifold - requir-ing object detection and instance association - and adapt-ing all its components is non-trivial. In this paper, we an-alyze the effect of domain shift on appearance-based track-ers, and introduce DARTH, a holistic test-time adaptation framework for MOT. We propose a detection consistency formulation to adapt object detection in a self-supervised fashion, while adapting the instance appearance represen-tations via our novel patch contrastive loss. We evaluate our method on a variety of domain shifts - including sim-to-real, outdoor-to-indoor, indoor-to-outdoor - and substan-tially improve the source model performance on all metrics.
Project page: https://www.vis.xyz/pub/darth. 1.

Introduction
Multiple object tracking (MOT) represents a cornerstone of modern perception systems for challenging computer vi-sion applications, such as autonomous driving [17], video surveillance [16], behavior analysis [26], and augmented re-ality [46]. Laying the ground for safety-critical downstream perception and planning tasks - e.g. obstacle avoidance, mo-tion estimation, prediction of vehicles and pedestrians in-tentions, and the consequent path planning - the robustness of MOT to diverse conditions is of uttermost importance.
[28] could result
However, domain shift in life-threatening failures of MOT pipelines, due to the percep-tion system’s inability to understand previously unseen en-vironments and provide meaningful signals for downstream planning. To the best of our knowledge, despite the urge of addressing domain adaptation for MOT to enable safer driv-ing and video analysis, no solution has ever been proposed.
This paper analyzes the effect of domain shift on MOT, e c r u o
S t e g r a
T
. p a d
A o
N
H
T
R
A
D
Figure 1. We illustrate the effect of domain shift on MOT, and how our test-time adaptation technique (DARTH) counteracts it.
The top row shows the in-domain performance of a model trained on the synthetic dataset SHIFT [60] (Source); the same model (No
Adap.) suffers from domain shift when deployed on the real-world
BDD100K [70] (Target); the bottom row shows the benefits of
DARTH. Each row shows two frames spaced by k =2 seconds; boxes of the same color correspond to the same tracking ID. and proposes a test-time adaptation solution to counteract it.
We focus on appearance-based tracking, which shows state-of-the-art performance across a variety of datasets [19], out-performs motion-based trackers in complex scenarios - i.e.
BDD100K [70] - and complements motion cues for superior tracking performance [75]. Since appearance-based track-ers [31, 66, 1, 45] associate detections through time based on the similarity of their learnable appearance embeddings, domain shift threatens the performance of both their detec-tion and instance association stages (Table 1).
Test-time adaptation (TTA) offers a practical solution to domain shift by adapting a pre-trained model to any unla-beled target domain in absence of the original source do-main. However, current TTA techniques are tailored to classification tasks [63, 8, 64, 40] or require altering the source training procedure [61, 35, 42], and they have been 1
shown to struggle in complex scenarios [35]. Consequently, the development of TTA solutions for MOT is non-trivial.
While recent work further investigates TTA for object de-tection [33, 57], solving TTA for detection is not sufficient to recover MOT systems (see SFOD [33] in Table 5), as in-stance association plays an equally crucial role in tracking.
To this end, we introduce a holistic test-time adaptation framework that addresses the manifold nature of MOT (Fig-ure 2). We propose a detection consistency formulation to adapt object detection in a self-supervised fashion and en-force its robustness to photometric changes, since tracking benefits from consistency of detection results in adjacent frames. Moreover, we adapt instance association and learn meaningful instance appearance representations on the tar-get domain by introducing a patch contrastive loss, which enforces self-matching of the appearance of detected in-stances under differently augmented views of the same im-age. Finally, we update the teacher as an exponential mov-ing average (EMA) of the student model to benefit from the adapted student representations and gradually improve the detection targets for our consistency loss.
We name DARTH our test-time Domain Adaptation method for Recovering multiple object Tracking Holisti-cally. To the best of our knowledge, our proposal is the first solution to the domain adaptation problem for MOT.
We evaluate DARTH on a variety of domain shifts across the driving datasets SHIFT [60] and BDD100K [70], and the pedestrian datasets MOT17 [39] and DanceTrack [58], showing substantial improvements over the source model performance on all the evaluated metrics and settings.
We summarize our contributions: (i) we study the do-main shift problem for MOT and introduce the first test-time adaptation solution; (ii) we propose a detection con-sistency formulation to adapt object detection and enforce its consistency to photometric changes; (iii) we introduce a patch contrastive approach to adapt the appearance repre-sentations for better data association. 2.