Abstract
Scene reconstructions are often incomplete due to occlu-sions and limited viewpoints. There have been efforts to use semantic information for scene completion. However, the completed shapes may be rough and imprecise since re-spective methods rely on 3D convolution and/or lack effec-tive shape constraints. To overcome these limitations, we propose a semantic scene completion method based on de-formable deep implicit templates (DDIT). Speciﬁcally, we complete each segmented instance in a scene by deform-ing a template with a latent code. Such a template is ex-pressed by a deep implicit function in the canonical frame.
It abstracts the shape prior of a category, and thus can pro-vide constraints on the overall shape of an instance. La-tent code controls the deformation of template to guarantee
ﬁne details of an instance. For code prediction, we design a neural network that leverages both intra- and inter-instance information. We also introduce an algorithm to transform instances between the world and canonical frames based on geometric constraints and a hierarchical tree. To fur-ther improve accuracy, we jointly optimize the latent code and transformation by enforcing the zero-valued isosurface constraint. In addition, we establish a new dataset to solve different problems of existing datasets. Experiments showed that our DDIT outperforms state-of-the-art approaches. 1.

Introduction 3D scene reconstruction has been widely studied in the past decades. However, in practice, reconstructed scenes are often incomplete due to occlusions and limited view-points. Missing structures affect various practical applica-tions [32, 45, 43, 22, 23, 6, 41]. To complete a scene, several methods have been proposed. Some of them [17, 30, 10] only consider geometric information and are prone to result in noisy results. Recent work [15, 27] demonstrated that se-(cid:3)Haoang Li, Jinhu Dong, Binghui Wen and Ming Gao contributed equally to this work.
Figure 1. We complete a point set of an instance by deforming a deep implicit template with a latent code. mantic information can improve the completion quality. In this paper, we investigate semantic scene completion.
Existing semantic scene completion methods can be roughly classiﬁed into two main categories, i.e., scene-level [35, 40, 11, 31] and instance-level [26, 15, 27, 4, 16].
The scene-level methods directly complete the whole en-vironment, while the instance-level approaches separately complete each detected/segmented instance. The instance-level approaches are typically more accurate than the scene-level methods since per-instance completion can better han-dle different structures of instances. However, existing instance-level approaches still have some limitations. They may generate rough and unreasonable meshes since they rely on 3D convolution and/or lack effective shape con-straints. To overcome these limitations, we propose an instance-level method by deforming deep implicit templates with latent codes. As shown in Fig. 1, such a template ab-stracts the shape prior of a category, and thus can provide constraints on the overall shape of an instance. Latent code controls the deformation of template to guarantee ﬁne de-tails of an instance.
As shown in Fig. 2, given an incomplete point cloud of a scene in the world frame, we ﬁrst conduct instance segmen-tation. Then we transform each segmented point set from the world frame to the canonical frame. Our transforma-tion estimation is based on geometric constraints and a la-tent code-based hierarchical tree. It is more reliable and/or efﬁcient than existing algorithms [27, 1, 2]. In the canoni-cal frame, as mentioned above, we complete each point set by deforming a deep implicit template [46] with a latent
Figure 2. Pipeline of our DDIT. (a) Given an incomplete point cloud of a scene, we conduct instance segmentation and transform each segmented point set from the world frame to the canonical frame. (b) For each point set (let us take the orange one for example), we use its semantic label to retrieve a pre-trained deep implicit template. We also feed this point set and its neighbors to a neural network to predict a latent code. By deforming the retrieved template with the predicted code, we obtain a complete mesh. (c) We transform the complete mesh back into the world frame, followed by jointly optimizing its associated latent code and transformation. code. This template is expressed by a deep implicit func-tion and pre-trained using numerous CAD models from the same category. For latent code prediction, we design a neu-ral network that considers both intra- and inter-instance in-formation. Speciﬁcally, given a point set of an instance, we
ﬁrst divide it into several patches and use these patches to predict the initial code. Then we exploit point sets of neigh-boring instances from the same category to reﬁne the initial code. Intuitively, an instance and its neighbors may have similar overall shapes but different reconstructed parts (see different sides of sofas in Fig. 2). Different parts can pro-vide multi-view constraints on the deformation of template, improving the reliability of latent code.
After generating a complete mesh, we transform it back into the world frame. To further improve accuracy, we jointly optimize the latent code and transformation. We leverage the fact that surface points of an instance in the world frame correspond to the zero-valued signed distance function (SDF) in the canonical frame. In addition, exist-ing datasets [1, 14, 42] for semantic scene completion have some limitations, e.g., non-alignment between point sets and meshes, irrational relationship between meshes, and lack of partial data. We establish a new dataset to solve these problems. Overall, our main contributions are (cid:15) We propose to complete instances in a scene by de-forming deep implicit templates with latent codes. (cid:15) We design a neural network to predict latent codes based on intra- and inter-instance information. (cid:15) We estimate the instance transformation using geomet-ric constraints and a code-based hierarchical tree. (cid:15) We jointly optimize the latent code and transformation based on the zero-valued SDF constraint. (cid:15) We establish a new dataset for semantic scene comple-tion to overcome the limitations of existing ones.
Experiments showed that our DDIT outperforms state-of-the-art approaches [27, 36]. Our generated meshes show more reasonable overall shapes and ﬁner details, and also are better aligned to the observed incomplete point sets. 2.