Abstract
Multi-contrast MRI super-resolution (SR) and recon-struction methods aim to explore complementary informa-tion from the reference image to help the reconstruction of the target image. Existing deep learning-based methods usually manually design fusion rules to aggregate the multi-contrast images, fail to model their correlations accurately and lack certain interpretations. Against these issues, we propose a multi-contrast variational network (MC-VarNet) to explicitly model the relationship of multi-contrast im-ages. Our model is constructed based on an intuitive mo-tivation that multi-contrast images have consistent (edges and structures) and inconsistent (contrast) information. We thus build a model to reconstruct the target image and de-compose the reference image as a common component and a unique component. In the feature interaction phase, only the common component is transferred to the target image.
We solve the variational model and unfold the iterative so-lutions into a deep network. Hence, the proposed method combines the good interpretability of model-based methods with the powerful representation ability of deep learning-based methods. Experimental results on the multi-contrast
MRI reconstruction and SR demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed model. Especially, since we explicitly model the multi-contrast images, our model is more robust to the reference images with noises and large inconsistent struc-tures. The code is available at https://github.com/lpcccc-cv/MC-VarNet. 1.

Introduction
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is a noninvasive and non-ionizing medical imaging technique, which has been widely used in medical diagnosis, clinical analysis, and staging of disease [27]. However, MRI scanning is always time-consuming due to physics and physiological
*Corresponding author
Figure 1. The visualization of the multi-contrast images, i.e. T2 and PD, on IXI dataset. They have their unique contrast informa-tion (as shown in (e)), and they also share some common structure information (as shown in (f)). constraints. The scanning time of each patient usually takes more than ten minutes, which will affect the efﬁciency of diagnosis and cause discomfort to patients [8]. To accel-erate the acquisition of MRI, it is common to acquire the undersampled k-space measurements and then use the post-processing algorithms (e.g. super-resolution (SR) and re-construction) to restore its fully-sampled one.
The purpose of the MRI reconstruction is to eliminate aliasing artifacts caused by k-space undersampling and the
MRI SR aims to restore the missing high-frequency details from the low-resolution (LR) ones. In recent years, numer-ous MRI SR [44, 31, 42] and reconstruction [34, 29, 45, 23] methods have been emerged. However, they only use single-contrast MR images and fail to utilize the informa-tion from other modalities. In fact, radiologists tend to ac-quire images of bodies with different contrasts (e.g. T1-weighted and T2-weighted) to comprehensively evaluate patients’ conditions. Besides, since the sampling time of different contrasts is quite different, it is promising to utilize an HR (or fully-sampled) reference image with a shorter ac-quisition time to reconstruct the image with a longer scan-ning time [14]. We call them multi-contrast reconstruction
and multi-contrast SR. inconsistent information.
In recent years, deep convolution neural network (DCNN) has become a mainstream approach for solving the multi-contrast reconstruction [36, 30, 1, 40, 8] and multi-contrast SR [20, 7, 14, 6] problems. By designing proper fusion rules, reference information can be effec-tively transferred to the target image. Despite the promis-ing results of them, their networks are always handcrafted black boxes, which lack certain interpretations. Model-based methods [11, 35, 28] construct optimization models by designing priors for speciﬁc problems, and then they are solved by optimization algorithms, which are more inter-pretable than black-box DCNN methods. To incorporate interpretability and domain knowledge into deep networks, the model-driven DCNN methods have emerged to tackle various problems of image processing, including derain-ing [33], debluring [17], super-resolution [2, 3], CT metal artifact reduction [32] and so on. Their success also inspired us to design an interpretable and powerful model for the multi-contrast SR and reconstruction tasks.
In this paper, we propose a deep unfolding multi-contrast variational network (MC-VarNet) to explicitly model the correlations of multi-contrast images. According to our observation, as shown in Figure 1, multi-contrast images have the following two characteristics. Firstly, since they are sampled from the same body part, they usually contain some common structural information. Secondly, since the two images are sampled under different scan settings, they have their unique contrast information and some inconsis-tent structures. To effectively transfer useful information to the target image as well as avoid the interference of incon-sistent information, we build a variational model to recon-struct the target image and decompose the reference image into a common component and a unique component. In the feature interaction phase, only the common component is transferred to the target image.
To solve the variational model, we employ the half-quadratic splitting algorithm to optimize each variable and construct an MC-VarNet by unfolding the iterative steps into deep neural networks. Similar to learning-based meth-ods, MC-VarNet adaptively learns the deep priors from the reconstructed images and the decomposed components in a data-driven manner. Similar to model-based methods, MC-VarNet explicitly models the correlations of multi-contrast images, which is more transparent. The proposed MC-VarNet thus combines the advantages of model-based and deep learning-based methods. Our contributions can be summarized as:
• We propose a variational model to solve the multi-contrast MRI SR and reconstruction problems simul-taneously. In our model, we explicitly model the rela-tionship of multi-contrast images based on an observa-tion that different contrast images have consistent and
• We optimize the variational model using the half-quadratic splitting algorithm and unfold the iterative step into deep networks. Thus our model combines the good interpretability of the model-based methods with the powerful feature expression ability of the deep neu-ral networks.
• We test our model on guided MRI SR and reconstruc-tion tasks. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed model. Besides, since we explicitly model the multi-contrast images, the proposed model is more robust to the noise-polluted and inconsistent reference images compared with existing methods. 2.