Abstract
This paper solves the problem of real-time 6-DoF ob-ject tracking from an RGB video. Prior optimization-based methods optimize the object pose by aligning the projected model to the image based on handcrafted features, which are prone to suboptimal solutions. Recent learning-based methods use neural networks to predict the pose, which suffer from limited generalizability or computational efﬁ-ciency. We propose a learning-based active contour model to make the best use of both worlds. Speciﬁcally, given an initial pose, we project the object model to the image plane to obtain the initial contour and use a lightweight network to predict how the contour should move to match the true object boundary, which provides the gradients to optimize the object pose. We also devise an efﬁcient optimization algorithm to train our model end-to-end with pose super-vision. Experimental results on semi-synthetic and real-world 6-DoF object tracking datasets demonstrate that our model outperforms state-of-the-art methods by a substantial margin in pose accuracy, while achieving real-time perfor-mance on mobile devices. Code is available on our project page: https://zju3dv.github.io/deep_ac/. 1.

Introduction
Video-based 6-DoF object tracking is the task of track-ing the pose of a rigid object from an RGB image sequence, given a predeﬁned object CAD model and an initial pose in the ﬁrst frame, which has a broad range of applications from augmented reality and robotic manipulation to human-computer interaction. These applications require the track-ing algorithms to be real-time and avoid the need for object-speciﬁc training.
The predominant methods for 6-DoF object tracking op-timize the object pose based on keypoint, edge, or region-based features. Keypoint-based methods [34, 42, 18, 17,
∗The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally. The authors from Zhejiang
University are afﬁliated with the State Key Lab of CAD&CG and ZJU-SenseTime Joint Lab of 3D Vision.
†Corresponding author: Xiaowei Zhou. le
Sample
Network
Netw
Op
Optimizemize
Figure 1. The basic idea of deep active contours. Given the ini-tial object pose, we project the object model to the image, sample a set of points on the projected contours, use a network to predict the distribution of true boundary location along the normal at each sampled point, and optimize the pose to align the projected con-tours with the predicted boundary. 43, 27] involve matching keypoints between a 2D image and a 3D real model. Keypoint features such as SIFT [25],
ORB [30], or BRISK [19] have been widely employed in such tasks. Nevertheless, the reliance on rich texture nar-rows down the applicability of these methods.
Instead, edge-based tracking methods [6, 33, 53, 32] rely on edges (explicit or implicit) to calculate the relative pose between two consecutive images. Unfortunately, these approaches face challenges when dealing with background clutter and motion blur, thus limiting their effectiveness. To solve this issue, more recent edge-based methods [46, 44, 14, 13, 39] further incorporate local color information to improve accu-racy. Recent progress is mainly achieved by region-based approaches [28, 40, 41, 36]. The underlying premise is that color statistics of object regions can be distinguished from the background. With constant advancements in re-cent years, region-based approaches now possess the capa-bility to track objects with efﬁciency and accuracy even in noisy and cluttered images, only utilizing a texture-less 3D model. However, a drawback of these optimization-based methods is the requirement for handcrafted features and carefully tuned hyper-parameters, which may not be robust in real-world scenarios.
Recently, end-to-end learning-based approaches have
been proposed to enhance the robustness of 6-DoF object detection and tracking. These approaches regress geomet-ric parameters such as camera poses [54, 16] and object coordinates [3, 12, 45], or adopt render-and-compare [23, 15, 55, 24, 48] strategies to iteratively reﬁne the pose. De-spite the demonstrated promising results, pose regression methods exhibit limited accuracy and poor generalization, while render-and-compare approaches are computationally expensive and inapplicable for real-time applications.
In this paper, we present a learning-based active con-tour model (DeepAC), for real-time 6-DoF object tracking.
By combining the beneﬁts of traditional optimization-based and learning-based methods, DeepAC achieves both robust-ness and real-time performance.
Inspired by the region-based approach RBGT [35], DeepAC takes the local re-gion around the projected contours as input and predicts the directions to update the contours. Unlike traditional methods that rely on handcrafted features and statistical hy-potheses, a network is employed to estimate the directions, as depicted in Figure1. Speciﬁcally, the proposed method presents a three-phase pipeline. First, DeepAC employs an
FPN-Lite network with MobileNetV2 [31] to extract multi-level features for the current image and projects the 3D ob-ject model to acquire the 2D contours from the last frame pose. Then, a boundary prediction network is designed which utilizes the features of the local regions around the contours as input and outputs a probability distribution of the true boundary locations. Finally, the 6-DoF object pose is optimized using Newton’s method based on the boundary probability. The optimization process is differentiable w.r.t. the network output, allowing the use of ground-truth poses as supervision to train the feature extraction and boundary prediction networks, hence eliminating the need for hand-crafted intermediate supervision.
We validate the effectiveness of our proposed method on both semi-synthetic and real-world 6-DoF object-tracking datasets. The results demonstrate that DeepAC surpasses other optimization-based and learning-based baselines by a large margin. Moreover, we demonstrate the real-time per-formance of our algorithm on a mobile device, achieving a frame rate of 25fps on iPhone 11. Please see the demo video in the supplementary material.
Our key contributions are summarized below:
• A novel learning-based active contour model for real-time 6-DoF object tracking.
• A lightweight network to evolve the contours based on image features, which ensures both robustness and ef-ﬁciency.
• An efﬁcient optimization algorithm that allows the whole pipeline to be trained end-to-end with pose su-pervision. 2.