Abstract
Diffractive blur and low light levels are two fundamental challenges in producing high-quality photographs in under-display cameras (UDCs).
In this paper, we incorporate phase masks on display panels to tackle both challenges.
Our design inserts two phase masks, specifically two mi-crolens arrays, in front of and behind a display panel. The first phase mask concentrates light on the locations where the display is transparent so that more light passes through the display, and the second phase mask reverts the effect of the first phase mask. We further optimize the folding height of each microlens to improve the quality of PSFs and sup-press chromatic aberration. We evaluate our design using a physically-accurate simulator based on Fourier optics. The proposed design is able to double the light throughput while improving the invertibility of the PSFs. Lastly, we discuss the effect of our design on the display quality and show that implementation with polarization-dependent phase masks can leave the display quality uncompromised. 1.

Introduction
Diffraction is perhaps the fundamental limiter of perfor-mance in most imaging systems, and nowhere is this more readily apparent than in an under-display camera (UDC).
UDCs obtain photographs from the light that passes through the space between display pixels; since the spacing is small, often in tens of microns, the resulting blur due to diffrac-tion spans hundreds of pixels in the captured images and is hard to remove in post-processing. This deblurring is fur-ther complicated by the display blocking a large portion of light which results in the captured photograph having an un-usually low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR).
Much of the prior work in recent UDC imaging has been in designing deep neural networks to deblur [27, 12, 5, 26, 11]. Learning-based restoration largely outperforms con-ventional methods, such as Wiener deconvolution or regu-larized linear inverse techniques [3]. However, the perfor-mance of all techniques, whether regularized by analytical or data-driven priors, is affected strongly by the condition-Figure 1: A comparison between a UDC under a transparent-OLED display (a) without and (b) with the proposed phase masks. (From top to bottom) Rows show the setup, images captured under each, restored images us-ing a naive iterative solver, and using a state-of-the-art deep network [5]. We show PSNR(↑) in dB and SSIM(↑) for re-stored images. Both UDCs have a pixel density of 600 DPI. ing of the imaging model and SNR of the captured images.
Inspired by a large body of work that enhances capabil-ity of imaging systems with phase masks [22, 17, 10, 20, 8, 16, 19], we propose to design phase masks to suppress diffractive blur and increase light throughput for UDCs. We first show using basic Fourier optics [7] that inserting a thin phase mask at the display is ineffective in improving UDCs.
To overcome the limitation of a single phase mask, we pro-pose to use two phase masks—specifically two microlens arrays– placed in front of and behind the display; we do this for the specific case of transparent-OLEDs (TOLED), a display model commonly used in today’s cellphones. The
first phase mask distributes light to locations where the dis-play is transparent, and the second phase mask recovers the original waveform. Within some limits, this allows the in-cident light to pass through without being blocked by the display or effectively renders the display fully transparent!
In order to prevent the microlens arrays from hindering the display quality, we propose to implement them as thin polarization-dependent phase masks. A naive implemen-tation of microlens arrays as thin optics is to fold them at a fixed height. However, this results in severe chromatic aber-rations. We instead choose a different height for each mi-crolens through optimization, so that diffractive blur is sup-pressed equally at all wavelengths. Using simulations, we show that the proposed phase mask significantly increases the image quality of a UDC (see Figure 1). The code for this work is publicly available [23].
In summary, we make the following contributions:
• We show that a phase mask placed tightly against a dis-play is inadequate to improve the image quality of UDCs.
• We propose to insert two microlens arrays in front of and behind a TOLED, which effectively allows more light to reach the camera and produces more invertible PSFs.
• We implement the proposed microlens arrays as thin polarization-dependent phase masks, a design that en-sures light emitting from the display is not modulated and therefore guarantees high display quality.
• When implementing microlenses as thin optics, we op-timize the folding height of each microlens to minimize chromatic aberrations.
• We conduct simulation based on wave optics and physically-accurate camera pipeline and demonstrate that the proposed setup outperforms the conventional UDC.
Limitations. The proposed method has two limitations.
First, we show phase correction can suppress the diffractive blur of TOLED display, whose pattern is separable along x and y directions. Extending this to 2D displays is hard due to the high computational cost of simulating 2D short-distance propagation. Second, the field of view of the re-sulting UDC can be constrained by the use of phase masks.
This is determined by the ratio of the focal length f of mi-crolens arrays and the size of the pixel opening. Our choice of f produces a field of view of around 14◦. 2.