Abstract
Faster-RCNN [27]
Ground truth detections
The goal of this paper is to detect objects by exploit-ing their interrelationships. Contrary to existing methods, which learn objects and relations separately, our key idea is to learn the object-relation distribution jointly. We first propose a novel way of creating a graphical representa-tion of an image from inter-object relation priors and ini-tial class predictions, we call a context-likelihood graph.
We then learn the joint distribution with an energy-based modeling technique which allows to sample and refine the context-likelihood graph iteratively for a given image. Our formulation of jointly learning the distribution enables us to generate a more accurate graph representation of an im-age which leads to a better object detection performance.
We demonstrate the benefits of our context-likelihood graph formulation and the energy-based graph refinement via ex-periments on the Visual Genome and MS-COCO datasets where we achieve a consistent improvement over object de-tectors like DETR and Faster-RCNN, as well as alternative methods modeling object interrelationships separately. Our method is detector agnostic, end-to-end trainable, and es-pecially beneficial for rare object classes. 1.

Introduction
Object detection is a classical task in computer vi-sion [2, 29], where methods in the last decade have evolved from deep convolutional architectures [38, 37, 26, 4] to self-attention based transformer networks [5, 49, 35, 42]. Al-though these two approaches vary widely in architecture, they both focus exclusively on the image space for feature representation, rather than incorporating contextual seman-tics about object categories. Once fed with sufficient data, these architectures might implicitly learn some object rela-tions, but prior works [21, 45, 46, 44] have shown that ex-plicitly modeling object relations enhances object detection performance by a substantial margin.
Amongst existing work on modeling object relations,
Jiang et al. [21] hypothesize that in case a dataset has lit-tle information about certain classes, incorporating prior
Initial context-likelihood graph Results after energy-refinement
Figure 1. We generate a context-likelihood graph from the initial predictions of a base detector, here Faster-RCNN, by incorporating inter-object relation priors. Having learnt the joint object-relation distribution, we iteratively sample a refined graph by energy opti-mization. This enables us to predict objects undetected by Faster-RCNN, due to their relations or co-occurrence patterns with al-ready detected objects. For instance, the detection of a face makes the occurrence of eyes or a nose much more likely and vice versa.
Likewise for the trousers in the presence of a man, which are not even present in the ground truth. knowledge in the training of a detector should improve de-tection. This prior knowledge could be from another source, or it could even be distilled from the original dataset. The authors establish a novel way of explicitly incorporating se-mantic prior knowledge into a base object detection frame-work by predicting object-relations from features, creating a graphical representation of the image. Xu et al. [45] pro-pose to predict object relations solely from object features and their spatial orientation, without any extra prior infor-mation, by creating a sparse graphical representation. Both these methods are dependent on the correctness of the pre-dicted relations since they refine the object features for clas-sification. Instead of predicting an explicit graph represen-tation, Xu et al. [46] enhance object detection by evolv-ing high-level semantic representations globally, rather than relying solely on visual features. This is accomplished 1
through a network that generates a global semantic pool and adapts each object’s features by attending to different se-mantic contexts in the pool, automatically discovering the most relevant categories for feature evolution. Although all these works utilize prior knowledge about objects in their problem formulation, they do so consecutively making them critically dependant on the object features. Instead, we pro-pose to model the objects and their relations jointly from the start, in order to have a better understanding of the scene and infer better class predictions.
Our main contributions are thereby as follows: (1) We propose a novel way of leveraging inter-object rela-tion priors for object detectors during training by creat-ing a context-likelihood graph with relation edges based on initial class predictions. (Sec. 3.1). (2) We demonstrate the potential of our context-likelihood graph with an empirical evaluation showing that in-corporating inter-object relations from the start leads to substantially better object detection rates when us-ing a graph built with ground truth class predictions (Sec. 3.2). (3) We introduce an energy-based method for learning object-relation joint distribution, which allows to itera-tively refine our context-likelihood graph to further ben-efit us in our end task (Sec. 3.3).
Experiments on the Visual Genome [23] and MS-COCO [28] datasets demonstrate our method is detector agnostic, end-to-end trainable, and especially beneficial for rare object classes. What is more, we establish a consis-tent improvement over object detectors like DETR [5] and
Faster-RCNN [38], as well as alternative methods modeling object interrelationships. Before introducing our method, we first provide more background on related works. 2.