Abstract
Existing offboard 3D detectors always follow a modular pipeline design to take advantage of unlimited sequential point clouds. We have found that the full potential of off-board 3D detectors is not explored mainly due to two rea-sons: (1) the onboard multi-object tracker cannot gener-ate sufficient complete object trajectories, and (2) the mo-tion state of objects poses an inevitable challenge for the object-centric refining stage in leveraging the long-term temporal context representation. To tackle these problems, we propose a novel paradigm of offboard 3D object detec-tion, named DetZero. Concretely, an offline tracker cou-pled with a multi-frame detector is proposed to focus on the completeness of generated object tracks. An attention-mechanism refining module is proposed to strengthen con-textual information interaction across long-term sequential point clouds for object refining with decomposed regression methods. Extensive experiments on Waymo Open Dataset show our DetZero outperforms all state-of-the-art onboard and offboard 3D detection methods. Notably, DetZero ranks 1st place on Waymo 3D object detection leaderboard1 with 85.15 mAPH (L2) detection performance. Further experi-ments validate the application of taking the place of human labels with such high-quality results. Our empirical study leads to rethinking conventions and interesting findings that can guide future research on offboard 3D object detection.
*Work performed during internship at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence
Laboratory.
Figure 1. We compare several SOTA methods proposed along the timeline on the Waymo 3D detection leaderboard. Our DetZero obtains the best performance with a remarkable margin on Vehi-cle. We mark the number of input point cloud frames below each method. Please refer to Table 1 for a detailed comparison. 1.

Introduction
Autonomous driving has rapidly advanced with promis-ing progress in both industry and academia. A crucial com-ponent of this development is offboard 3D object detec-tion, which can utilize entire sequence data from sensors (video or sequential point cloud) with few constraints on model capacity and inference speed. Therefore, some ap-proaches [33, 50] are dedicated to developing high-quality
“auto labels”, aiming to reduce manual labor in point cloud annotation. 1https://waymo.com/open/challenges/2020/3d-detection/.
Subsequently, many online detectors [54, 8, 56] are in-serve as the foundation for leveraging the long-term sequen-tial point clouds in a decomposed paradigm: refine the ge-ometry size, smooth the trajectory position, and update the confidence score.
By focusing on these main issues, we propose a new paradigm of offboard 3D object detection named DetZero.
A tenet is underscored here: emphasizing high-recall de-tection and tracking during the upstream, meticulous high-accuracy refining with long-term temporal context during the downstream. Comprehensive empirical studies and evaluations on the Waymo Open Dataset (WOD) demon-strate that DetZero significantly improves perception by fully utilizing long-term sequential point clouds. Notably, we rank 1st place on WOD 3D object detection leaderboard with 85.15 mAPH (L2). Extensive ablation studies and gen-eralization experiments show that our method performs well with different quality upstream inputs and stricter metrics.
Semi-supervised experiments further demonstrate that our method can provide high-quality auto labels for onboard 3D object detection models, which are already on par or even slightly higher than human labels.
The main contributions of our work are summarized as follows:
• We introduce DetZero, a new paradigm of offboard 3D object detection, to activate the potential of long-term sequential point clouds.
• Our proposed multi-frame object detection and offline tracking module generates accurate and complete ob-ject tracks, which is crucial for downstream refine-ment.
• An attention-mechanism based refining module is pro-posed to leverage the long-term temporal contextual information for objects’ attribute predictions.
• We achieve state-of-the-art 3D object detection perfor-mance and tracking performance on the challenging
WOD with remarkable margins. 2.