Abstract
Photometric stereo aims to recover detailed surface shapes from images captured under varying illuminations.
However, existing real-world datasets primarily focus on evaluating photometric stereo for general non-Lambertian reflectances and feature bulgy shapes that have a cer-tain height. As shape detail recovery is the key strength of photometric stereo over other 3D reconstruction tech-niques, and the near-planar surfaces widely exist in cul-tural relics and manufacturing workpieces, we present a new real-world dataset DiLiGenT-Π containing 30 near-planar scenes with rich surface details. This dataset en-ables us to evaluate recent photometric stereo methods specifically for their ability to estimate shape details un-der diverse materials and to identify open problems such as near-planar surface normal estimation from uncalibrated photometric stereo and surface detail recovery for translu-cent materials. To inspire future research, this dataset will open soruced at https://photometricstereo. github.io/diligentpi.html. 1.

Introduction
Photometric stereo [47, 44] aims at single view three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction from image observations captured under varying lights. Compared to structured light-based 3D reconstruction techniques that are widely applied in commercial scanners, the key strength of photo-metric stereo is the detailed surface shape recovery, which is of great interest for additive manufacturing and rendering.
To evaluate the effectiveness of photometric stereo meth-ods, a batch of real-world benchmark datasets have been
† Equally contributed authors
‡ Corresponding authors. built such as DiLiGenT [43, 41] (and its multi-view ex-tension DiLiGenT-MV [29]), DiLiGenT102 [39] for distant lights, and LUCES [34] for near lights. Existing datasets focus on evaluating the effectiveness of photometric stereo techniques on non-Lambertian surfaces, revealing the per-formance of existing methods on real-world scenes. Since the majority of target objects in these datasets are smooth surfaces (some of them with a portion of detailed structures on the surface), it is hard to evaluate the accuracy of sur-face detail recovery, which is unique to photometric stereo over other 3D reconstruction techniques. On the other hand, near-planar surfaces usually accompanied with rich details are commonly observed in our daily life, such as reliefs, badges, and coins. However, existing photometric stereo datasets mainly choose statue-like objects or other bulgy shapes with a certain height as targets, lacking sophisticated evaluation on near-planar surfaces.
In this paper, we build a new dataset named DiLiGenT-Π1 for photometric stereo focusing on the recovery of near-planar shape and surface details. As shown in Fig. 1, we col-lect 30 representative real-world planar objects with rapidly varied geometric details. The dataset can be categorized into 4 groups containing metallic, specular, rough, and translucent surface reflectance, respectively. The metal-lic group contains 10 metallic coins; the specular group in-cludes 10 enamel badges; the translucent group has 5 3D-printed objects made by photo-polymer resin, and the rough group contains 5 surfaces sharing the same geometry of the translucent group but sprayed with a matte paint [35]. In addition, our DiLiGenT-Π takes an optical profilometer to capture the ultra-precise surface 3D structure in nanometer 1‘DiLiGenT’ [41] as the abbreviation of Directional Lighting, General reflectance, with the ‘ground Truth’ shapes for photometric stereo bench-marking. As we take the similar assumptions, we refer DiLiGenT as prefix and use Π to indicate planar objects.
Figure 1: Overview of DiLiGenT-Π. We collect 4 groups of near-planar objects with rich surface details and diverse re-flectance types (metallic, specular, rough, and translucent). The corresponding ‘ground-truth’ surface normals shown in the even rows are measured via a precise profilometer in the accuracy of nanometers. accuracy, providing the ‘ground truth’ surface normal with well-preserved tiny surface details.
We apply DiLiGenT-Π to evaluate up-to-date photo-metric stereo methods under the settings of calibrated and uncalibrated distant light, and benchmark the reconstruc-tion performance on detailed structures and near-planar sur-faces. The evaluation results reveal the difference in surface detail recovery of learning-based photometric stereo meth-ods working with per-pixel and all-pixel manners [54]; the challenging problems of uncalibrated photometric stereo for near-planar surfaces; and the influence of translucent and rough reflectance on surface detail recovery. The analy-sis on the DiLiGenT-Π presents new challenges and open problems for photometric stereo.
To summarize, this paper contributes to photometric stereo benchmark and inspires future research by propos-ing:
• the first real-world dataset, DiLiGenT-Π, that evaluates near-planar surfaces with rich geometric details;
• up-to-date benchmark evaluation of photometric stereo recovering important features for handling surface de-tails; while
• revealing inherent obstacles of planar detailed objects to photometric stereo with open problems. 2.