Abstract
Instance segmentation on point clouds is crucially im-portant for 3D scene understanding. Most SOTAs adopt distance clustering, which is typically effective but does not perform well in segmenting adjacent objects with the same semantic label (especially when they share neighboring points). Due to the uneven distribution of offset points, these existing methods can hardly cluster all instance points. To this end, we design a novel divide-and-conquer strategy named PBNet that binarizes each point and clusters them separately to segment instances. Our binary clustering di-vides offset instance points into two categories: high and low density points (HPs vs. LPs). Adjacent objects can be clearly separated by removing LPs, and then be com-pleted and refined by assigning LPs via a neighbor voting method. To suppress potential over-segmentation, we pro-pose to construct local scenes with the weight mask for each instance. As a plug-in, the proposed binary clustering can replace the traditional distance clustering and lead to con-sistent performance gains on many mainstream baselines.
A series of experiments on ScanNetV2 and S3DIS datasets indicate the superiority of our model. In particular, PBNet ranks first on the ScanNetV2 official benchmark challenge, achieving the highest mAP . Code will be available pub-licly at https://github.com/weiguangzhao/PBNet. 1.

Introduction
In this paper, we consider instance segmentation for 3D point clouds that aims to classify each point of 3D clouds as well as separating objects from each class. While a large body of successful algorithms have been developed for 2D images [28, 13, 2, 29], most of these methods are not par-*Corresponding author the proposed PBNet. Points
Figure 1. Distance clustering vs. dropped in the distance clustering are called ignored points. Clus-tering based on HPs can better segment adjacent instances ( high-lighted in rectangular boxes), while the neighbor voting based on
LPs can complete the instance (highlighted in ellipses). ticularly effective for 3D point clouds due to the inherent irregularity and sparsity in 3D data [7, 11, 48].
In 3D point cloud segmentation, PointGroup [21] pro-posed a distance clustering framework to generate prelim-inary instance proposals. Although this framework is still being adopted by most SOTAs [14, 27, 3, 41, 45], it may usually have the following shortcomings: (1) distance clus-tering is limited to segment the adjacent objects with the same semantic label, especially when neighboring points are sticking together; (2) distance clustering only consid-ers points within a distance threshold, which may generate incomplete instances.
To alleviate these drawbacks, we propose a novel pro-posal generation framework to better segment adjacent ob-jects and complete instances. Inspired by DBSCAN algo-rithm [10], we divide foreground points into two categories: high and low density points (HPs vs. LPs), depending on the density of each point on the offset branch. As such, neighbor points between adjacent objects are binarized to
LPs. Without the interference of neighbor points, group-ing HPs can effectively separate adjacent objects. After that, we combine semantic prediction and neighbor voting
to assign LPs. In this way, PBNet completely clusters all predicted instance points and works much more reasonable than the traditional distance clustering. The advantages of our methods are illustrated in Fig. 1 where PBNet offers much better segmentation than the distance clustering. No-tably, as shown in the experiments, by simply replacing the traditional distance clustering component, the proposed bi-nary clustering strategy could also lead to significant perfor-mance gains on other mainstream baselines including Point-Group [21] and HAIS [3].
Furthermore, taking into account the effects of offset er-ror and density threshold, some larger objects such as sofas and tables have a certain probability of being divided into multiple instances. We further propose to search surround-ing instances for each instance to construct the correspond-ing local scene. By designing a concise strategy, we en-code each instance in each local scene to generate the corre-sponding weight mask, thus offering the network with prior knowledge to better focus on the primary instance. Com-bining the global features and the local features, the final instance mask in the local scene will be predicted. Based on point-wise binarization and local scene, PBNet attains superior performance on both ScanNetV2 [5] and S3DIS [1] dataset. The contributions of our work are as follows:
• By dividing and conquering, we propose a novel clus-tering method based on binarized points to effectively segment adjacent objects and cluster all predicted in-stance points. It is appealing that by simply replacing the traditional distance clustering, our proposed binary clustering strategy can also lead to significant perfor-mance gains on many mainstream baselines.
• We propose to construct local scenes combined with global feature and weight mask to refine instances, which can suppress over-segmentation and further boost the performance substantially.
• Overall, we design a novel end-to-end 3D instance segmentation framework which significantly outper-forms current SOTAs for 3D instance segmentation: our model ranks the first on mAP metric of the Scan-NetV2 official benchmark challenge. 2.