Abstract
Face de-identification involves concealing the true iden-tity of a face while retaining other facial characteristics.
Current target-generic methods typically disentangle iden-tity features in the latent space, using adversarial training to balance privacy and utility. However, this pattern of-ten leads to a trade-off between privacy and utility, and the latent space remains difficult to explain. To address these issues, we propose IDeudemon, which employs a “divide and conquer” strategy to protect identity and preserve util-ity step by step while maintaining good explainability. In
Step I, we obfuscate the 3D disentangled ID code calculated by a parametric NeRF model to protect identity. In Step II, we incorporate visual similarity assistance and train a GAN with adjusted losses to preserve image utility. Thanks to the powerful 3D prior and delicate generative designs, our approach could protect the identity naturally, produce high quality details and is robust to different poses and expres-sions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed
IDeudemon outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods. 1.

Introduction
Concerns about individual private information disclo-sure are growing with the development of computer vision techniques and image understanding applications. Face de-identification is a process which aims to remove all iden-tification information of the person from an image, while maintaining as much information on the action and its con-text [1]. Ideally, while the identity information is protected, other identity-agnostic features (e.g., pose, expression and background) will not be affected. The de-identified images can still be used for identity-agnostic tasks, such as face detection and expression recognition. Accordingly, great efforts are paid to achieve an effective privacy utility trade-off [2–9]. Face de-identification can allow individuals to share personal portraits with confidence, while eliminating some ethical and legal restraints on facial data releasing.
Early face de-identification methods carry out various obfuscation operations on detected private area, which se-riously impair the image’s ornamental value and are not re-liable when facing advanced face recognition tools [10]. K-same family methods [11–13] are once hot, but they are re-strained by their strict using conditions. At present, there are two main types of methods. One kind uses adversarial noise to generate de-identified faces which can be visually indistinguishable from the original one [14–16]. However, they are highly dependent on the accessibility to target sys-tems, and lack generalization ability. The other kind ex-ploits generative adversarial networks (GANs) to disentan-gle, manipulate and finally protect identity features in the latent spaces [2–9]. These methods strive to strike a balance between privacy and utility through adversarial training in a network. The results depend heavily on the degree of latent space disentanglement, which is neither clear nor satisfac-tory. Besides, most existing methods cannot preserve vari-ous poses and expressions, which also need to be improved.
Unlike previous works, we aim to break away from this traditional privacy utility trade-off in face de-identification studies, and instead provide a reliable and explainable method of protecting individual identities. Our inspiration for this approach stems from the observation that wearing a human skin mask can effectively change one’s identity. This realization highlights that a convincing de-identification re-quires substantial changes to the overall geometry of the facial features such as eyes, nose, ears, mouth, and fa-cial bones. Such transformations are practically impossible to achieve with mere makeup or even surgical procedures (since that surpass the physical limits of the human body).
In contrast, hairstyle, accessories, and skin color are exam-ples of identity-agnostic features that can be easily altered by a stylist. However, they significantly impact the human perception of visual similarity between two faces. Thus, we contend that protecting privacy and retaining utility can be two distinct objectives that necessitate different strategies.
By separating these objectives, we can focus on each objec-tive independently to achieve better results.
Figure 1. IDeudemon for face de-identification at different resolutions. (a) 256 × 256, (b) 512 × 512, (c) 1024 × 1024. In each pair, left is the original image and right is the corresponding de-identified result. The results show that face identities are changed in a perceptually natural manner, while all other characteristics (hairstyles, accessories, backgrounds, poses, expressions, etc.) remain the same.
Our proposed solution, IDeudemon, adopts the “divide and conquer” strategy to achieve privacy protection and util-ity preservation in two distinct steps. In the first step, we use a 3D parametric modeling approach to estimate the fa-cial geometry and obfuscate the face’s 3D identity repre-sentation to conceal the real identity. Specifically, we begin by leveraging a monocular face reconstruction network to approximate the coarse 3D parameters of the given face.
Using this initialization, we employ a neural radiance field (NeRF) model to calculate the face’s accurate 3D parame-ters (ID code, appearance code and camera code). Subse-quently, we apply a protective perturbation to the real ID code to get the protected ID code. Finally, the NeRF model renders an identity-protected fitted face, which has a signif-icant change in the facial features’ geometric structure.
In the second step, we focus on producing high qual-ity images based on the fitted face, which is neither natural nor realistic. We first use face parsing maps to preserve the identity-agnostic features and maintain the visual similarity with the original image as much as possible. Then, we train a GAN to restore the de-identified face with realistic details by referring to generative facial priors. Finally, we can ac-quire high quality visual pleasing de-identified results.
Our main contributions are described as follows:
• We propose IDeudemon, a novel two-step NeRF-based method for face de-identification. Instead of achieving privacy utility trade-off in one network adversarially, for the first time, we divide privacy protection and util-ity preservation into two separate steps. IDeudemon can protect identity without weighing the image utility at the same time, and has good explainability [17].
• We confuse the real identity by a 3D parametric
NeRF model, which modifies the facial geometry and changes the identity. Hence, our method has excel-lent privacy performance and this process is explain-able. The definition of the identity refers to the mature 3D prior from 3DMMs, and is refined by the NeRF model. This verified disentangled identity code makes
IDeudemon well preserve non-identity features, such as expression, pose and illumination.
• We propose a second step to intently restore high qual-ity faces based on the fitted results of NeRF. We devise visual similarity assistance to retain identity-agnostic features and train a GAN to generate realistic facial de-tails. These designs lead to good utility performance.
• Experimental results on two diverse face datasets (eth-nicity, age, etc.) have shown the effectiveness of our proposed IDeudemon. In particular, our method bril-liantly maintain the original poses and expressions, and can achieve face de-identification on megapixels. 2.