Abstract
Recently, there has been a growing interest in learning-based explicit methods due to their ability to respect the original input and preserve details. However, the connec-tivity on complex structures is still difficult to infer due to the limited local shape perception, resulting in artifacts and non-watertight triangles.
In this paper, we present a novel learning-based method with Delaunay triangula-tion to achieve high-precision reconstruction. We model the Delaunay triangulation as a dual graph, extract local geometric information from the points, and embed it into the structural representation of Delaunay triangulation in an organic way, benefiting fine-grained details reconstruc-tion. To encourage neighborhood information interaction of edges and nodes in the graph, we introduce a local graph iteration algorithm, which is a variant of graph neural net-work. Moreover, a geometric constraint loss further im-proves the classification of tetrahedrons. Benefiting from our fully local network, a scaling strategy is designed to en-able large-scale reconstruction. Experiments show that our method yields watertight and high-quality meshes. Espe-cially for some thin structures and sharp edges, our method shows better performance than the current state-of-the-art methods. Furthermore, it has a strong adaptability to point clouds of different densities. 1.

Introduction
Surface reconstruction from a given point cloud is a long-standing problem in computer vision and graphics
[7, 1, 28, 27, 34, 59, 4, 60, 25, 21, 17, 36, 8]. A widely used framework is to first compute an implicit representa-tion and then extract the resulting surface using Marching
Cubes [37].
Implicit methods typically produce a water-tight mesh and have the advantage of noise resistance, but present over-smoothing and loss of detail in the face of fine
*Corresponding author.
Figure 1: A comparison of our approach with the two state-of-the-art explicit methods on challenging sharp edges and complex thin structures composed of sparse data. structures [4]. On the other hand, some methods from com-putational geometry [16, 5, 31, 22, 44, 33] construct explicit meshes by point set triangulation, where the key feature is that the vertices of the output mesh come from the input point cloud. As an advantage, these explicit methods re-spect the original point set to preserve sharp features and fine structures.
More recently, several learning-based explicit methods with point set triangulation have been proposed, which demonstrate a good performance. A category of methods, such as DSE [51], PointTriNet [52] and IER Meshing [35], learn to generate connected triangles locally in an itera-tive manner. They can preserve some linear structures to some extent, but ensuring watertightness is a challenge for them. Although DSE reports good results with few non-watertight triangles, it still struggles with inferring trian-gular connectivity on complex topologies. Another cate-gory of method, DeepDT [38], learns the classification of tetrahedrons from Delaunay triangulation. It improves upon traditional approaches that use graph cuts and visibility in-formation, by employing a multi-layer Graph Convolution
Network (GCN) [29] to break the limitation of visibility in-formation. DeepDT achieves good results on objects with hundreds of thousands of points, but struggles with recon-structing sparse data, especially for complex thin structures and sharp edges (see Figure 1). There are several impor-tant reasons for this. 1) The tangent plane features used
between points are inadequate for expressing the local dis-tribution information of the point cloud, which leads to a weak perception of the local geometry. 2) The simple com-bination of point features without structural representation results in ambiguous tetrahedral features for classification. 3) The employed graph neural network lacks a strong con-nection to the Delaunay triangulation structure, providing inadequate interaction with local information. Moreover, dealing with large-scale data is also a tricky problem for
DeepDT.
Nonetheless, the application of Delaunay triangulation without visibility information remains a topic worth ex-In contrast to generating connected triangles lo-ploring. cally, Delaunay triangulation pre-constructs global candi-date triangles, containing a more accurate surface approx-imation [2] and ensuring the watertightness and non-self-intersection of the mesh. Additionally, Delaunay triangu-lation possesses an excellent property of adapting to point density, enabling it to strike a balance between resolution, efficiency, and resource occupation. It suggests that further exploration of the potential of Delaunay triangulation for high-precision reconstruction is necessary to address some of the challenges faced by current learning-based explicit approaches, such as 1) high-quality reconstruction of thin structures and sharp edges, 2) good compatibility with data of different densities on a well-trained model, especially for sparse data, and 3) efficient scalability to handle large-scale data.
In this paper, we present Delaunay Meshing Network (DMNet), a completely local approach for surface recon-struction that captures fine details and scales efficiently. In stark contrast to the previous approaches, each tetrahedron and triangular facet in the Delaunay triangulation can be in-dividually encoded in our method. To accurately perceive local geometry, our graph feature encoder captures both their morphological structure information and the neighbor-hood points distribution information of their vertices. Ad-ditionally, an offset position of the vertex is calculated to enable the organic embedding of the vertex features into the structural representation. This enables our method to bet-ter capture geometric differences between tetrahedrons in-side and outside the local surface for robust labeling. To obtain more comprehensive neighborhood information, we design a variant of the graph neural network called Local
Graph Iteration. As a form of local graph structure regular-ization, it utilizes simple self-attention modules and MLPs to iteratively process one-hop node features, without rely-ing on a global adjacency matrix in GCN. Furthermore, we take into account the connection relationship between nodes and adjacent edges in the Delaunay triangulation structure, incorporating edge features into the information interac-tion. Compared to GCN, it provides a more powerful lo-cal processing capability with only a few iteration layers.
To avoid large triangle artifacts, we further propose a shape constraint loss to constrain the shape of the extracted tri-angles. Benefiting from the local network processing, an octree-based scaling strategy is proposed for separating the dual graph, which allows our approach to handle large-scale real data with millions of points like DTU [24]. Our exper-iments demonstrate the superiority of our approach across some challenging tasks. In summary, our contributions are as follows: 1) Our graph feature construction integrates multi-geometry information from Delaunay triangulation, allow-ing our method to preserve rich fine-grained details, espe-cially for thin structures and sharp edges. 2) Local Graph Iteration algorithm is tailored for De-launay triangulation, promoting ample interaction among neighborhood information. Both it and the geometric con-straint loss allow better classification of tetrahedrons. 3) The robust local processing capability of our network allows for a good generalization to data of varying densi-ties, even sparse data. Additionally, the combination with our scaling strategy enables efficient scalability with high precision. 2.