Abstract
Unsupervised methods for reconstructing structures face significant challenges in capturing the geometric details with consistent structures among diverse shapes of the same category. To address this issue, we present a novel unsuper-vised structural reconstruction method, named DPF-Net, based on a new Deformable Primitive Field (DPF) repre-sentation, which allows for high-quality shape reconstruc-tion using parameterized geometric primitives. We design a two-stage shape reconstruction pipeline which consists of a primitive generation module and a primitive deformation module to approximate the target shape of each part pro-gressively. The primitive generation module estimates the explicit orientation, position, and size parameters of pa-rameterized geometric primitives, while the primitive de-formation module predicts a dense deformation field based on a parameterized primitive field to recover shape details.
The strong shape prior encoded in parameterized geometric primitives enables our DPF-Net to extract high-level struc-tures and recover fine-grained shape details consistently.
The experimental results on three categories of objects in diverse shapes demonstrate the effectiveness and general-ization ability of our DPF-Net on structural reconstruction and shape segmentation. 1.

Introduction
Objects of the same category typically share common parts, for example, the seat, backrest, and legs of chairs.
These parts form the concise and compact structure of the objects. Extracting this part-level structure from 3D objects is essential in many applications that require part-level pre-diction, such as shape editing, dynamics simulation, and physical reasoning, including path planning and grasping.
Many supervised approaches [13, 33, 16, 15, 30] have been proposed to learn a latent structural representation for
*Corresponding author 3D shapes. However, these methods require part-level an-notations of 3D objects, which are very time-consuming to obtain. Unsupervised structural reconstruction methods at-tempt to learn structural representations of objects by fitting the target shape with a set of geometric primitives, such as cuboids [26, 25, 31], planes [4], and convexes [8]. Although some methods have shown the ability to predict structure-consistent results from unlabeled objects, they tend to gen-erate over-partitioned structures in regions of rich geomet-ric details. Implicit functions [14, 6, 18] have shown their strong power for modeling geometric details and been ap-plied for structural shape reconstruction [5, 17]. However, under the unsupervised learning scheme, these methods ex-tract high-level inter-category common structures from re-construction error only. Without any structural supervision and shape priors, they face significant challenges in approx-imating detailed shapes in diverse structures.
Taking advantage of the expression power of the implicit functions for geometric details and the generalization abil-ity of geometric primitives to extract high-level structures, we propose a novel deformable primitive field representa-tion that integrates the implicit deformation field and pa-rameterized primitives. Considering the shape resemblance between man-made object parts to geometric primitives, we propose a new explicit structure representation based on simple geometric primitives. In contrast to existing meth-ods that assemble basic geometric primitives to fit the target shape, we consider primitives as structural proxies which can be further deformed for shape refinement. To support deformation to fit the geometric details of each part, we design a field-based representation for primitives, named parameterized primitive field (PPF), which can be learned end-to-end. To improve the expression ability of the primi-tive fields for detailed geometry, we further concatenate an implicit deformation field to bridge the gap between the ab-stract structural representation and fine-grained shape de-tails of diverse 3D shapes.
Specifically, we propose DPF-Net, a novel unsuper-vised structural reconstruction method to approximate tar-get shapes by assembling a set of deformable primitive fields. We design a two-stage shape reconstruction pipeline that consists of a Primitive Generation Module (PGM) and a Primitive Deformation Module (PDM) for each part. The
PGM estimates the explicit orientation, position, and size parameters of parameterized geometric primitives for each part from the encoded shape feature. These parameter-ized primitives generated by PGMs can be considered as an intermediate structural representation of the target shape.
Then the PDM predicts dense deformation fields based on the parameterized primitive shape field of each part to re-cover geometric details. Each part is assigned a predicted confidence of whether it appears in a specific target shape.
An occupancy field is finally constructed by assembling all the deformed primitive fields of parts with their confi-dences. The whole reconstruction network is trained end-to-end in an unsupervised manner from the shape recon-struction error. The strong shape prior of our parameter-ized primitives allows our DPF-Net to focus on extracting high-level structure at the first module and recovering fine-grained shape details in the second module. Combining the explicitly parameterized primitives and implicit deforma-tion fields, we achieve high-quality structural reconstruction for various shapes with consistent structures. 2.