Abstract
Stereo depth estimation usually struggles to deal with textureless scenes for both traditional and learning-based methods due to the inherent dependence on image corre-spondence matching. In this paper, we propose a novel neu-ral network, i.e., DPS-Net, to exploit both the prior geo-metric knowledge and polarimetric information for depth estimation with two polarimetric stereo images. Specifi-cally, we construct both RGB and polarization correlation volumes to fully leverage the multi-domain similarity be-tween polarimetric stereo images. Since inherent ambigu-ities exist in the polarization images, we introduce the iso-depth cost explicitly into the network to solve these ambi-guities. Moreover, we design a cascaded dual-GRU archi-tecture to recurrently update the disparity and effectively fuse both the multi-domain correlation features and the iso-depth cost. Besides, we present new synthetic and real po-larimetric stereo datasets for evaluation. Experimental re-sults demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art stereo depth estimation methods. 1.

Introduction
Stereo depth estimation is a classical computer vision task, playing an important role in many applications, e.g., autonomous driving, robotics, and VR/AR. Traditional methods [16, 21, 27, 33, 36, 44, 47] often solve a per-pixel depth by finding pixelwise correspondences across in-put images, which thus normally struggle to handle texture-less areas. Recently, many methods [5, 6, 15, 20, 46, 14] have been proposed to exploit deep learning techniques and achieved promising results. Thanks to their learned shape priors, these methods can generate smooth results in tex-tureless regions. But the recovered depth at textureless re-gions is unreliable since the correspondence is intrinsically ambiguous.
To reconstruct textureless objects, some previous meth-ods exploit additional shape cues, such as photometric
*Corresponding author. stereo [12, 30, 32, 50], shape-from-shading [35, 31, 40], and shape-from-polarization [1, 18, 28, 29, 31, 2]. Among them, the polarization constraint is passive and provides strong information on local surface orientations. Thus, it attracts more and more attention for 3D reconstruction and has been integrated with multi-view stereo [8, 49], SLAM
[43], stereo normal estimation [13] and stereo depth esti-mation [51, 25]. These methods combine multi-view trian-gulation with the surface normal estimated from the polar-ization, and therefore improve the 3D reconstruction at tex-tureless regions. However, these methods usually assume a smooth surface or controlled illumination, which is nor-mally limited to object-level scenarios or specific capturing environments. Moreover, these methods struggle to handle the inherent azimuth or zenith angle ambiguities [7] in the surface estimation from the polarization images, e.g., re-lying on a pre-computed coarse depth or assuming known reflection types.
In this paper, we aim to design an end-to-end neural network to predict the depth from polarimetric stereo im-ages, which learns to exploit the polarization information for accurate depth estimation of complex scenes. How-ever, it is nontrivial to design such a model due to the fol-lowing challenges. First, since the polarimetric and photo-metric domains maintain different characters of the scene, a straightforward combination may not fully exploit the multi-domain information. Moreover, similar to traditional polarimetric 3D modeling methods, we need to solve the in-herent ambiguities in the polarization information, includ-ing the azimuth and zenith angle ambiguities. Lastly, there are few real polarimetric stereo datasets that are sufficient for network training.
To deal with these challenges, we propose a novel DPS-Net with a cascaded dual-GRU (Gated Recurrent Unit) module that tightly integrates the polarization constraints and learned shape priors for robust polarimetric stereo depth estimation. Specifically speaking, to better exploit the multi-domain knowledge, we first extract per-pixel features and construct both RGB and polarization correlation vol-ume pyramids for stereo matching, and explicitly introduce the geometric constraint from the polarization into the net-In order to handle the inherent ambiguities of po-work. larization information, we adopt the iso-depth constraints instead of direct surface normal constraint in the network to bypass both the zenith angle ambiguity and π-ambiguity of azimuth angle, and construct a unified iso-depth cost with different reflection to handle the π/2-ambiguity of azimuth angle. In addition, along the gradient descent direction of the iso-depth cost, we further calculate the virtual disparity and retrieve the virtual feature from the correlation pyra-mids for the information integration in the followed refine-ment stage. To fully exploit the multi-domain similarity (which refers to the similarity of the RGB and the polar-ization images) and iso-depth cost for stereo depth estima-tion, we design a cascaded dual-GRU architecture in our network. In the first GRU of each iteration, the disparity increment is regressed directly from the multi-domain cor-relation feature. Then, the disparity is further optimized in the second GRU based on the iso-depth cost and the virtual correlation feature. Through the cascaded dual-GRU archi-tecture and the recurrent optimization process, our method can balance the diverse inputs well and resist the distur-bance of polarimetric noises under uncontrolled illumina-tion. At last, we present a synthetic dataset simulating the polarimetric stereo pattern and a real dataset captured by a polarization stereo system for the network training.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows. Firstly, we propose the first learning-based framework for polari-metric stereo depth estimation, which exploits both prior knowledge and polarization information. Secondly, we present a novel cascaded dual-GRU architecture and inte-grate both the multi-domain similarity measurement and the iso-depth constraint from the polarization cue to solve the inherent ambiguities in the polarization and enable high-quality and robust stereo estimation. Thirdly, we present both synthetic and real polarimetric stereo datasets, which can also benefit the community. We conduct extensive ex-periments, and the results show that our method performs better than the state-of-the-art learning-based methods and traditional polarimetric methods. 2.