Abstract
RAW files are the initial measurement of scene radiance widely used in most cameras, and the ubiquitously-used
RGB images are converted from RAW data through Image
Signal Processing (ISP) pipelines. Nowadays, digital images are risky of being nefariously manipulated.
In-spired by the fact that innate immunity is the first line of body defense, we propose DRAW, a novel scheme of defending images against manipulation by protecting their sources, i.e., camera-shooted RAWs. Specifically, we design a lightweight Multi-frequency Partial Fusion Network (MPF-Net) friendly to devices with limited computing resources by frequency learning and partial feature fusion.
It introduces invisible watermarks as protective signal into the RAW data. The protection capability can not only be transferred into the rendered RGB images regardless of the applied ISP pipeline, but also is resilient to post-processing operations such as blurring or compression. Once the image is manipulated, we can accurately identify the forged areas with a localization network. Extensive experiments on several famous RAW datasets, e.g., RAISE, FiveK and
SIDD, indicate the effectiveness of our method. We hope that this technique can be used in future cameras as an option for image protection, which could effectively restrict image manipulation at the source. 1.

Introduction
In the digital world, the credibility of the famous say-ing “seeing is believing" is largely at risk since nowadays people can easily manipulate critical content within an im-age and redistribute the fabricated version via the Inter-net. Owing to the fact that readers are more susceptible to well-crafted misleading material, fabricated images can be a means for some politicians to sway public opinion. In more severe cases, those fraudulent images can be used to bolster fake news or criminal investigation.
*Xiaoxiao Hu and Qichao Ying contribute equally to this work.
†Corresponding author: Zhenxing Qian (zxqian@fudan.edu.cn)
Figure 1. DRAW improves the performance of image manipula-tion localization against lossy image operations via imperceptible protective signal injection into RAW files.
Image manipulation detection [9, 32] and localiza-tion [10, 38] has become a critical area of research for decades, with the goal of distinguishing manipulated im-ages from authentic ones and locating the manipulated ar-eas. While early methods mainly check the integrity of the images from statistical aspects, e.g., the Photo-Response
Non-Uniformity (PRNU) noise [9] and the fixed pattern noise (FPN) [23], the uprising of deep networks has greatly strengthened the capability to find traces left by a variety of manipulation [10, 40, 19]. However, the adversary is also continuously evolving both in strength and diversity.
For example, recent deep-network-based image editing al-gorithms [36, 13] are reported to produce highly realis-tic images with almost no visible artifacts near the edges.
Therefore, it remains a big issue whether the learned subtle forensics traces can always be present in the newly forged images. Also, though some works [38, 39] explicitly handle lossy online transmission scenarios, they still face limited performance against well-crafted forgeries, e.g., inpainting, or lossy image operations, e.g., Gaussian blurring.
Inspired by the fact that innate immunity is the first line of body defense and the best weapon to mitigate diseases, safeguarding images against manipulations is an alternative and promising way of deterring malicious attackers. Indeed, the ubiquitous 8-bit RGB images are not the pristine format for reflecting how we perceive the world. They are con-verted from RAW files via ISP pipelines. Therefore, we
propose DRAW, a proactive image protection scheme that defends camera-shooted RAW data against malicious ma-nipulation on the RGB domain. Specifically, we propose to introduce imperceptible protective signal into the RAW data, which can be transferred into the rendered RGB im-ages, even though various types of ISP pipelines are ap-plied. Once these images are manipulated, the localization networks can exactly localize the forged areas regardless of image post-processing operations such as blurring, com-pression or color jittering. Besides, a novel Multi-frequency
Partial Fusion Network (MPF-Net) is proposed to imple-ment RAW protection, which adopts frequency learning and cross-frequency partial feature fusion to significantly de-crease the computational complexity. We illustrate the func-tionality of DRAW in Fig. 1, which promotes accurate ma-nipulation localization without affecting the visual quality.
Extensive experiments on several famous RAW datasets, e.g., RAISE, FiveK and SIDD, prove the imperceptibility, robustness and generalizability of our method. Besides, to compare RAW-domain protection with previous works, we tempt to borrow the success of RGB-domain protec-tion [4, 48] as the baseline method for proactive manip-ulation localization. The results show that DRAW hosts a noticeable performance gain and a nontrivial benefit of content-related adaptive embedding. In addition, MPF-Net provides superior performance compared to classical U-Net [33] architecture with only 20.9% of its memory cost and 0.95% of its parameters. The novel lightweight archi-tecture makes it possible to be integrated into cameras in the future, thereby changing the current situation where digital images can be freely manipulated.
The contributions of this paper are three-folded, namely: 1. DRAW is the first to propose RAW protection against image manipulation. The corresponding RGB images will carry imperceptible protective signal even though various types of imaging pipelines or lossy image op-erations are applied. 2. With RAW protection, image manipulation localiza-tion networks can better resist lossy image operations such as JPEG compression, blurring and rescaling. 3. A novel lightweight MPF-Net is proposed for integrat-ing RAW protection into cameras in the future, thereby potentially changing the current situation where digital images can be freely manipulated. 2.