Abstract
Reconstructing both objects and hands in 3D from a sin-gle RGB image is complex. Existing methods rely on man-ually defined hand-object constraints in Euclidean space, leading to suboptimal feature learning. Compared with Eu-clidean space, hyperbolic space better preserves the ge-ometric properties of meshes thanks to its exponentially-growing space distance, which amplifies the differences be-In this work, we tween the features based on similarity. propose the first precise hand-object reconstruction method in hyperbolic space, namely Dynamic Hyperbolic Attention
Network (DHANet), which leverages intrinsic properties of hyperbolic space to learn representative features. Our method that projects mesh and image features into a unified hyperbolic space includes two modules, i.e. dynamic hy-perbolic graph convolution and image-attention hyperbolic graph convolution. With these two modules, our method learns mesh features with rich geometry-image multi-modal information and models better hand-object interaction. Our method provides a promising alternative for fine hand-object reconstruction in hyperbolic space. Extensive experi-ments on three public datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms most state-of-the-art methods. 1.

Introduction 3D hand-object reconstruction from monocular RGB im-ages is a fundamental task in computer vision. Given a single RGB image of a hand interacting with an object, it aims at predicting a 3D mesh of both the hand and the object under the correct pose and precisely modeling the hand-object interaction. Although the 3D posed reconstruc-tion has a wide application in human-machine interaction, robotic grasping/learning, and augmented reality, the chal-*corresponding author
Figure 1. Colored dots indicate the features of the hand and the object. Existing methods learn image features in Euclidean space but struggle to model the contact region, resulting in separated colored dots. Our DHANet learns mesh and image features in hyperbolic space, better modeling the hand-object interaction that ensures the distribution of colored dots preserves the hand-object contact relationship. And our method results in a more accurate reconstruction, highlighted by the red circles. lenges of this task still remain in two aspects: 1) Recon-structing meshes with the pose and scale consistent with the input; 2) Fulfilling the physiological rules on hands and physical characteristics of hand-object interaction.
Existing methods deal with hand-object images or meshes in Euclidean space [17, 28, 21, 15, 9, 51, 42, 46, 5, 14], which learn image features and regress model param-eters of hand and object from Euclidean embeddings. To accurately reconstruct meshes of hands and objects, espe-cially around the area of mutual occlusion, existing meth-ods [28, 21, 15, 42, 9, 51] optimize the reconstruction by taking the physical interaction between the hand and the object as a cue. These methods can be broadly divided into
two categories: learning-based methods and optimization-based methods. Learning-based methods employ attention mechanism [28, 21, 15], and other advanced models [42, 9, 51] to model hand-object interactions. Optimization-based methods integrate physical constraints, like Spring-mass System [46] and 3D contact priors [5, 14] with con-tact loss functions, to constraint the optimization process.
Existing methods almost directly regress the model param-eters of hand-object meshes from image features and man-ually define interaction constraints without exploiting the geometrical information. In this work, we seek for learning geometry-image multi-modal features in hyperbolic space to reconstruct accurate meshes.
As mentioned in recent research on Representation
Learning in hyperbolic space [23, 2, 30, 34, 47], the ef-fectiveness of Euclidean space for graph-related learning tasks is still bounded, failed to provide powerful geomet-rical representations. Compared to Euclidean space, hyper-bolic space exhibits the potential to learn representative fea-tures. Due to the exponential growth property of hyperbolic space, it is innately suitable to embed tree-like or hierarchi-cal structures with low distortion while preserving local and geometric information [34, 47]. There have been attempts to represent and process mesh and image features in hyper-bolic space [22, 39, 38, 1, 2, 23]. However, joint feature learning of meshes and images in hyperbolic space for ac-curate hand-object reconstruction has not yet been explored.
To this end, we propose the first method based on hy-perbolic space for hand-object reconstruction, named Dy-namic Hyperbolic Attention Network (DHANet), to lever-age the benefits of hyperbolic space for geometrical feature learning (see Fig. 1). Our approach consists of three mod-ules, image-to-mesh estimation, dynamic hyperbolic graph convolution, and image-attention hyperbolic graph convo-lution. Firstly, the image-to-mesh estimation module ge-ometrically approximates the hand and object from an in-put image. Secondly, hand and object meshes are pro-jected to hyperbolic space for better preserving the geomet-rical information. Our dynamic hyperbolic graph convo-lution dynamically builds neighborhood graphs in hyper-bolic space to learn mesh features with rich geometric in-formation. Thirdly, we project mesh and image features to a unified hyperbolic space, preserving the spatial distribu-tion between hand and object. Our image-attention hyper-bolic graph convolution embeds the distribution into fea-ture learning and models the hand-object interaction in a learnable way. With these modules, our method learns more representative geometry-image multi-modal features for ac-curate hand object reconstruction. Comprehensive evalua-tions of our method on three public hand-object datasets, namely Obman dataset [17], FHB dataset [10], and HO-3d dataset [14], where DHANet outperforms most state-of-the-art methods, confirm the superiority of our design.
The main contributions of our work are as follows:
• We are the first to address hand-object reconstruction in hyperbolic space, proposing a novel Dynamic Hy-perbolic Attention Network.
• We devise a Dynamic Hyperbolic Graph Convolution to dynamically learn mesh features with rich geometry information in hyperbolic space.
• We introduce an Image-attention Graph Convolution to learn geometry-image multi-modal features and to model hand-object interactions in hyperbolic space. 2.