Abstract
Detecting symmetrical properties is a fundamental task in 3D shape analysis. In the case of a 3D model with planar symmetries, each point has a corresponding mirror point w.r.t. a symmetry plane, and the correspondences remain in-variant under any arbitrary Euclidean transformation. Our proposed method, E3Sym, aims to detect planar reflective symmetry in an unsupervised and end-to-end manner by leveraging E(3) invariance. E3Sym establishes robust point correspondences through the use of E(3) invariant features extracted from a lightweight neural network, from which the dense symmetry prediction is produced. We also intro-duce a novel and efficient clustering algorithm to aggregate the dense prediction and produce a detected symmetry set, allowing for the detection of an arbitrary number of pla-nar symmetries while ensuring the method remains differen-tiable for end-to-end training. Our method also possesses the ability to infer reasonable planar symmetries from in-complete shapes, which remains challenging for existing methods. Extensive experiments demonstrate that E3Sym is both effective and robust, outperforming state-of-the-art methods. 1.

Introduction
Symmetry is a ubiquitous phenomenon in the real world, from microscopic to macroscopic, from virtual to the nat-ural world, from architecture to art. Over the last few decades, considerable attention has been paid to symme-try detection from 2D to 3D. As a valuable property in 3D shape analysis, symmetry is employed in a wide range of
*Corresponding author tasks such as 3D reconstruction [26, 45, 47, 10], pose es-timation [1], shape matching [17], etc. As a result, robust and accurate symmetry detection is required for various ap-plications. In this paper, we focus on detecting global planar symmetry of 3D shapes.
Most of the early advances fall into one of the three cat-egories: matching-based [27, 49, 46], sampling-based [43, 7, 31, 16, 20] and regression-based [15, 11, 42] methods.
Matching-based methods detect symmetries by matching local shape signatures in pairs, generating potential sym-metry planes, and optimizing them to obtain reasonable solutions. Therefore, the key of matching-based methods is to make the local shape signatures robust or invariant w.r.t. Euclidean transformations. By sampling numerous candidates in the transformation space and further verifica-tion, the main issue of sampling-based methods is their high computational complexity if exhaustive sampling is used, or generating inaccurate candidates when heuristic sampling is used, necessitating complicated optimization. With the help of expressive power of deep neural networks and large amounts of training data, regression-based methods detect symmetries by regressing symmetry parameters or symme-try point coordinates in a supervised [15, 42] or unsuper-vised [11] fashion.
It is evident that if we can establish accurate symmet-ric correspondences from the shape, it is straightforward to find the planar symmetries. Generally, the symmetric cor-respondences with similar appearances or geometric struc-tures are in a way that is position and orientation invariant.
The correspondence matching is based on the fact that local shape patterns of symmetric counterparts are invariant and should not be sensitive to symmetry transformations. Al-though this seems intuitive, how to establish the correspon-dences accurately and robustly is still challenging, which
is also the crucial requirement of matching-based methods.
It can be even more challenging for symmetry detection of partial shapes where part of the otherwise globally symmet-ric shape is missing.
In this paper, we introduce a novel approach to estimat-ing 3D global planar symmetry, called E3Sym, in a fully unsupervised fashion. Formally, for a given shape, we use a point cloud as its representation for input. Specifically, for each point in the point cloud, we retrieve its neighborhood to discriminatively describe its local pattern. By extract-ing E(3) invariant features (which are invariant under ro-tation, reflection and translation transformations in the 3D
Euclidean space) of each local patch with an encoder net-work, the local geometric patterns are invariant to Euclidean transformations, from which we can easily and effectively establish the dense symmetric point correspondences. Once the dense symmetric correspondences are established, the dense potential symmetry planes are deduced. To make our method fully differentiable and trainable in an end-to-end manner, we propose a novel and efficient clustering algo-rithm to aggregate the dense prediction and produce the de-tected symmetry set.
To summarize, the main contributions of our work can be summarized as follows:
• We propose leveraging E(3) invariance to detect 3D pla-nar symmetries in an end-to-end and unsupervised man-ner.
• Our approach is capable of handling shapes with an arbi-trary number of planar symmetries and achieves state-of-the-art performance in symmetry detection.
• Our proposed method exhibits the ability to identify reasonable planar symmetries from incomplete shapes, which has been a persistently challenging task for exist-ing methods. 2.