Abstract
Space-filling curves (SFCs) act as a linearization ap-proach to map data in higher dimensional space to lower dimensional space, which is used comprehensively in com-puter vision, such as image/point cloud compression, hash-ing and etc. Currently, researchers formulate the problem of searching for an optimal SFC to the problem of find-ing a single Hamiltonian circuit on the image grid graph.
Existing methods adopt graph neural networks (GNN) for
SFC search. By modeling the pixel grid as a graph, they first adopt GNN to predict the edge weights and then gen-erate a minimum spanning tree (MST) based on the predic-tions, which is further used to construct the SFC. However,
GNN-based methods suffer from high computational costs and memory footprint usage. Besides, MST generation is un-differentiable, which is infeasible to optimize via gradi-ent descent. To remedy these issues, we propose a GNN-based SFC-search framework with a tailored algorithm that largely reduces computational cost of GNN. Additionally, we propose a siamese network learning scheme to optimize
DNN-based models in an end-to-end fashion. Extensive experiments show that our proposed method outperforms both DNN-based methods and traditional SFCs, e.g. Hilbert curve, by a large margin on various benchmarks. 1.

Introduction
Space-filling curves (SFCs) are performed as the data linearization method which transforms data in n-D to 1D sequence.
It has various applications in computer vision tasks, such as image/point cloud compression [22, 40], im-age transmission [25], data clustering [27], and geography hashing [1]. Currently, SFCs are widely used in deep learn-ing tasks like point cloud analysis [4] and knowledge distilla-tion [?]. Traditional SFCs are in fractal structures with many useful properties that can benefit many downstream appli-cations. For example, Hilbert curve [12], with a locality-preserving structure, is widely used in data compression tasks. Z-curve [28] significantly accelerate the hashing prob-lem thanks to its jump-connected structure.
Figure 1: Comparison between our method and Hilbert curve. It can be found that the SFC generated by our model is determined by the image context while Hilbert curve has a fixed structure.
However, with a fixed structure, traditional SFCs lack flexibility when facing different data and tasks, which lim-its the broader application of SFCs.
To further improve the performance of SFCs, data-(see Figure 1) adaptive space-filling curves are proposed.
Previous works [44, 29, 6] mainly focus on the context of image, such as pixel difference and image gradient during
SFC generation. Then it can reach better locality-preserving
In these works, properties compared with Hilbert curve. the generation of SFCs is transformed into the problem of finding a Hamiltonian path in a grid graph as shown in Fig-ure 2. Currently, following the same SFC modeling scheme, researchers attempt to generate high-quality SFCs via deep learning-based approach [39]. Specifically, they first gen-erate multiple small circuits based on a graph G and pre-dict the edge weights WG′ in dual graph G′ through graph neural networks (GNN) [17, 38]. Then, they search for a
Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) on G′, and finally, a single
Hamiltonian circuit is formed according to the MST. Pow-ered by deep neural networks, the learning-based methods outperform traditional data-adaptive SFCs by a large margin.
However, the application of such methods is limited by the high computational cost since GNN is very GPU-consuming when dealing with grid graphs (e.g. the adjacency matrix of 1
rized as follow:
• We introduce an Effective-GCN (EGCN) module that tailors grid graphs. It dramatically decreases the mem-ory cost of GCN.
• We propose a new learning scheme to find optimal
SFCs in the end-to-end manner.
• We adopt a multi-stage MST algorithm, which helps generate stable SFCs.
• Extensive experiments show that our method outper-forms both DNN-based and traditional methods. 2.