Abstract
Capturing high-dimensional social interactions and feasi-ble futures is essential for predicting trajectories. To address this complex nature, several attempts have been devoted to reducing the dimensionality of the output variables via parametric curve fitting such as the B´ezier curve and B-spline function. However, these functions, which originate in computer graphics fields, are not suitable to account for so-cially acceptable human dynamics. In this paper, we present
EigenTrajectory (ET), a trajectory prediction approach that uses a novel trajectory descriptor to form a compact space, known here as ET space, in place of Euclidean space, for representing pedestrian movements. We first reduce the com-plexity of the trajectory descriptor via a low-rank approxi-mation. We transform the pedestrians’ history paths into our
ET space represented by spatio-temporal principle compo-nents, and feed them into off-the-shelf trajectory forecasting models. The inputs and outputs of the models as well as social interactions are all gathered and aggregated in the corresponding ET space. Lastly, we propose a trajectory anchor-based refinement method to cover all possible futures in the proposed ET space. Extensive experiments demon-strate that our EigenTrajectory predictor can significantly improve both the prediction accuracy and reliability of ex-isting trajectory forecasting models on public benchmarks, indicating that the proposed descriptor is suited to represent pedestrian behaviors. Code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/inhwanbae/EigenTrajectory. 1.

Introduction
Trajectory prediction involves forecasting the future foot-steps of agents based on their past movements. This task is considered one of the core technologies for autonomous navigation, social robot platforms and surveillance systems.
Many existing approaches [1, 2, 5, 10, 15, 19, 28, 35, 36, 37, 40, 48, 55, 69, 73, 74, 77, 101, 108, 109] design their pre-diction models in the Euclidean space, i.e., to directly infer
*Work done during an internship at Carnegie Mellon University.
†Corresponding author
Figure 1. A common pipeline of trajectory prediction models and the proposed EigenTrajectory. For each observation, (a) existing models predict future trajectories using the raw data in Euclidean space; (b) our approach transforms the raw data into our ET space, then captures the social interaction and predicts the coefficient of our trajectory descriptor. a sequence of 2D coordinates of future frames. These ap-proaches force the models to learn both informative behav-ioral features and their motion dynamics from raw trajectory data. Such direct predictions can intuitively describe agents’ behaviors in the temporal series of spatial coordinates; how-ever, in a higher-dimensional space, it is hard for the models to determine explanatory features.
Recent works have described the pedestrian’s movements using trajectory descriptors instead of dealing with all raw coordinate information. Inspired by human beings traveling pathways with a higher level of connotation (e.g., a person who gradually decelerates to turn right, or makes a sharp turn while going straight) [66], parametric curve functions are introduced. In particular, Hug et al. [22, 23] introduce the B´ezier curve, and Jazayeri and Jahangiri [25] propose a
B-spline curve-based representation for effectively modeling continuous-time trajectories. These methods successfully reduce the dimensionality of trajectories by abstractly repre-senting lengthy sequential coordinates in a spatial domain using a smaller set of key points. It is, however, unclear how well these parametric functions can capture human mo-tions and behaviors as they have been designed for computer graphics [17, 62, 71] and part modeling [86, 89, 91].
In this paper, departing from existing parametric curve functions, we present an intuitive trajectory descriptor that is learnable from real-world human trajectory data as illus-trated in Fig. 1. First, we decompose a stacked trajectory sequence using Singular Value Decomposition (SVD). To represent the data concisely, we reduce the dimensionality by performing the best rank-k approximation. Through this process, all trajectories can be approximated as a linear com-bination of k eigenvectors, which we call EigenTrajectory (ET) descriptor. Next, we aggregate the social interaction features and then predict the coefficients of the eigenvectors for the future path in the same space. Here, after clustering the coefficients, a set of trajectory anchors, which can be interpreted as the coefficient candidates, is used to ensure a diversity of prediction paths. Finally, trajectory coordi-nates can be reconstructed through the matrix multiplication of the eigenvector and the coefficients. Experimental re-sults demonstrate that the proposed EigenTrajectory (ET) descriptor can successfully represent the pedestrian motion dynamics and significantly improve the prediction accuracy of existing prediction models on various public benchmarks. 2.