Abstract 1.

Introduction
We present EMDB, the Electromagnetic Database of
Global 3D Human Pose and Shape in the Wild. EMDB is a novel dataset that contains high-quality 3D SMPL pose and shape parameters with global body and camera trajec-tories for in-the-wild videos. We use body-worn, wireless electromagnetic (EM) sensors and a hand-held iPhone to record a total of 58 minutes of motion data, distributed over 81 indoor and outdoor sequences and 10 participants. To-gether with accurate body poses and shapes, we also pro-vide global camera poses and body root trajectories. To construct EMDB, we propose a multi-stage optimization procedure, which first fits SMPL to the 6-DoF EM measure-ments and then refines the poses via image observations. To achieve high-quality results, we leverage a neural implicit avatar model to reconstruct detailed human surface ge-ometry and appearance, which allows for improved align-ment and smoothness via a dense pixel-level objective. Our evaluations, conducted with a multi-view volumetric cap-ture system, indicate that EMDB has an expected accuracy of 2.3 cm positional and 10.6 degrees angular error, sur-passing the accuracy of previous in-the-wild datasets. We evaluate existing state-of-the-art monocular RGB methods for camera-relative and global pose estimation on EMDB.
EMDB is publicly available under https://ait.ethz.ch/emdb. 3D human pose and shape estimation from monocu-lar RGB images is a long-standing computer vision prob-lem with many applications in AR/VR, robotics, assisted living, rehabilitation, or sports analysis. Much progress has been made in estimating camera-relative poses, typ-ically assuming a weak-perspective camera model, e.g.,
[7, 25, 29, 30, 51]. However, this setting is too restrictive for many applications that involve a moving camera. Such applications must estimate a) human poses in-the-wild, un-der occlusion and encountering uncommon poses; and b) global locations of humans and the camera. Compared to the camera-relative setting, there is relatively little work on global pose estimation [65, 69]. This is in part due to the lack of comprehensive datasets that contain accurate 3D hu-man pose and shape with global trajectories in a fully in-the-wild setting.
To overcome this bottleneck, in this paper we propose a novel dataset, called EMDB, short for the ElectroMagnetic
DataBase of Global 3D Human Pose and Shape in the Wild.
EMDB consists of 58 minutes (105k frames) of challeng-ing 3D human motion recorded in diverse scenes. We pro-vide high-quality pose and shape annotations, as well as global body root and camera trajectories. The dataset con-tains 81 sequences distributed over 10 participants that were recorded with a hand-held mobile phone.
Recording such data requires a motion capture system that is both mobile and accurate – a notoriously difficult problem. Systems that provide world-anchored 3D body keypoints often require multiple well-calibrated RGB or IR cameras within a static environment, which restricts out-door use [16, 18, 20, 37]. While body-worn sensors such as head-mounted cameras [46, 63, 72] are promising for mo-bile use, such egocentric approaches introduce either heavy self-occlusions [46, 63] or are restricted to indoor settings with a fixed capture volume [72]. The 3DPW dataset [59] uses IMU sensors for outdoor recordings, yet the dataset is relatively small and lacks global trajectories. Moreover,
IMU drift and the lack of direct positional sensor measure-ments imposes constraints in terms of pose diversity and ac-curacy. Instead, following [23], we leverage drift-free elec-tromagnetic (EM) sensors that directly measure their posi-tion and orientation. Yet, any sensor-based capture system requires handling of measurement noise, accurate calibra-tion of the sensors to the body’s coordinate system and tem-poral and spatial alignment of the data streams.
Addressing these challenges, we propose a method,
Electromagnetic Poser (EMP), that allows for the construc-tion of EMDB. EMP is a multi-stage optimization formu-lation that fuses up to 12 body-worn EM sensor measure-ments, monocular RGB-D images and camera poses, and produces accurate SMPL [34] pose and shape parameters alongside global trajectory estimates for the body’s root and the camera. EMP works in the following 3 stages.
Calibration and EM Pose: As an initial calibration step, we scan participants in minimal clothing using an indoor multi-view volumetric capture system (MVS, [8]) to obtain ground-truth shape and skin-to-sensor offsets. We subse-quently record in-the-wild sequences of the same subject and fit SMPL to the drift-free EM measurements of the sen-sors’ positions and orientations. This provides an accurate
SMPL fit, albeit in a EM-local coordinate system.
World Alignment: In the second stage, we align the EM-local pose estimates with a global world space, defined by the tracking space of a hand-held iPhone 13 that films the participants. We model this stage as a joint optimization that fuses the input EM measurements, 2D keypoints, depth, and camera poses. In our experiments we have found that the self-localized 6D poses of the iPhone are accurate to around 2 cm positional and < 1 degree angular error. The fixed body shape and accurate camera poses thus enable EMP to provide global SMPL root trajectories.
Pixel-Level Refinement: In the third stage, we refine the initial global poses via dense pixel-level information to en-sure high-quality and temporally smooth image alignment.
To this end we leverage recent advancements in neural body modelling for in-the-wild videos and fit a neural body model with detailed geometry and appearance to the RGB images.
Following [13], we model the human as a deformable im-plicit signed distance field and the background as a neu-ral radiance field. This allows us to formulate a pixel-level RGB loss that compares color values obtained via composited neural rendering with the observed pixel value.
We jointly optimize the neural body model and the SMPL poses, initialized with the output of the second stage. We experimentally show that this final stage results in tempo-rally smooth results and accurate pose-to-image alignment.
We evaluate EMP on 21 sequences recorded with our
MVS [8], the same system we use to register ground-truth
SMPL shape parameters. With a pose accuracy of 2.3 cm positional and 10.6° angular error, our evaluations reveal that EMP is more accurate than what has been reported for 3DPW (2.6 cm, 12.1°) [59]. Also, our global SMPL root trajectories are accurate with an estimated error of 5.1 cm compared to our indoor MVS. Finally, we evaluate the performance of recent state-of-the-art camera-relative and global RGB-based pose estimators on EMDB. Our results show that EMDB is a new challenging dataset that will en-able future local and global pose estimation research.
In summary, we contribute: 1. EMDB, to the best of our knowledge the first comprehensive dataset to provide accu-rate SMPL poses, shapes, and trajectories in an unrestricted, mobile, in-the-wild scenario. 2. EMP, the first method to fuse EM measurements with image data and camera poses. 3. Extensive evaluations of the accuracy of EMP as well as baseline results of state-of-the-art work when evaluating on
EMDB. Data is available under https://ait.ethz.ch/emdb. 2.