Abstract
In this work, we present an end-to-end framework for camera-based 3D multi-object tracking, called DQTrack.
To avoid heuristic design in detection-based trackers, recent query-based approaches deal with identity-agnostic detec-tion and identity-aware tracking in a single embedding.
However, it brings inferior performance because of the in-herent representation conflict. To address this issue, we de-couple the single embedding into separated queries, i.e., ob-ject query and track query. Unlike previous detection-based and query-based methods, the decoupled-query paradigm utilizes task-specific queries and still maintains the com-pact pipeline without complex post-processing. Moreover, the learnable association and temporal update are designed to provide differentiable trajectory association and frame-by-frame query update, respectively. The proposed DQ-Track is demonstrated to achieve consistent gains in various benchmarks, outperforming previous tracking-by-detection and learning-based methods on the nuScenes dataset.1 1.

Introduction
Multi-object tracking (MOT) in 3D scenes is regarded as a crucial task to provide accurate object locations and iden-tities for downstream applications, like autonomous driving and robotics. For its complex nature, previous work has typ-ically employed pre-defined 3D detectors to localize objects and tailored post-processing to track them, i.e., the tracking-by-detection pipeline. Such an approach focuses more on motion model that heavily relies on geometry cues, like Eu-clidean distance [38, 43] and 3D IoU [33, 26]. Although it performs well in LiDAR scenarios [38, 26], it impedes the usage of appearance features in camera-based settings for better identity distinguish.
To this end, recent learning-based methods have emerged for end-to-end tracking. A typical stream is tracking-with-*Work done during an internship at NVIDIA. 1Code and demo: https://sites.google.com/view/dqtrack (a) Tracking-by-detection workflow (b) Tracking-with-query workflow (c) Decoupled-query workflow
Figure 1: Compared with others, the proposed decoupled-query approach in 1c avoids the representation conflict in single query of the tracking-with-query method 1b and heuristic processing in tracking-by-detection manner 1a. query [41], which employs queries in the transformer for the differentiable association. As presented in Figure 1b, current tracking-with-query approaches [24, 39, 41] usually adopt single query to solve the identity-agnostic detection and identity-aware tracking. However, it is hard to well balance the performance of detection and tracking simul-taneously in 3D scenes, as experimentally validated in Ta-ble 3. Although some studies [30] attempt to use decoupled queries in 2D MOT, their methods are limited by the heavy decoder for each query and the non-differentiable associa-tion part. Therefore, a well-designed end-to-end manner is desired for accurate 3D tracking and detection.
In this work, we propose a simple yet effective frame-work for 3D object tracking, termed DQTrack. Specifi-cally, it utilizes decoupled queries to address the task con-flict representation in previous query-based approaches [24, 39, 41], as briefly illustrated in Figure 1c. With the designed task-specific queries, DQTrack enhances the query capabil-ity while maintaining a compact tracking pipeline. More-over, unlike previous query-based work [41] in Figure 1b for movable objects only, both static and movable objects are well perceived in our proposed workflow.
Given the decoupled-query guideline, 3D object detec-tion can be easily solved with object query and DETR-type decoder [45]. The key question is how to track objects in an end-to-end framework. We provide the solution by solving two inherent issues in tracking, that is how to associate ob-jects to trajectories and how to update track representation at each frame. For the first problem, the learnable associa-tion is introduced to establish the differentiable relationship between objects and tracks.
In particular, embedding in-teraction is utilized to provide sufficiently interacted object embedding for track query initialization. And query asso-ciation is employed to better combine the appearance and geometry feature in track query, which enhances the robust-ness of the association. For the second one, we keep the representation of each track up-to-date for the next frame.
Here, the appearance and geometry features of each track query are updated in a frame-by-frame manner. With the above designs, we can easily optimize the framework and perform end-to-end 3D object tracking and detection.
Generally, our decoupled-query method is distinguished from two aspects. On one hand, compared with traditional tracking-by-detection methods, it avoids the heuristic de-sign with NMS and formulates an end-to-end framework with the learnable association. On the other hand, compared with recent tracking-with-query approaches, it overcomes the task conflict in single query embedding, thus further un-leashing the potential of query-based trackers.
The overall framework, called DQTrack, can be eas-ily instantiated with various encoders and decoders for 3D tracking and detection, as fully elaborated in Section 3. Ex-tensive empirical studies are conducted in Section 4 to re-veal the effectiveness of DQTrack. And we further com-pare with state-of-the-art approaches on the widely-adopted nuScenes [4] dataset. DQTrack is demonstrated to surpass all previous learning-based trackers and achieves leading performance with 52.3% AMOTA on the nuScenes test set. 2.