Abstract
We introduce a novel method to estimate the essential matrix for two-view Structure from Motion (SfM). We show that every 3 × 3 essential matrix can be embedded in a 4 × 4 rotation having its bottom right entry fixed to zero; we call the latter the quintessential matrix. This embedding leads to rich relations with the space of 4-D rotations, quaternions, and the classical twisted-pair ambiguity in two-view SfM.
We use this structure to derive a succession of semidefinite relaxations that require fewer parameters than the existing non-minimal solvers and yield faster convergence with cer-tifiable optimality. We then exploit the low-rank geometry of these relaxations to reduce them to an equivalent opti-mization on a Riemannian manifold and solve them via the
Riemannian Staircase method. The experimental evaluation confirms that our algorithm always finds the globally optimal solution and outperforms the existing non-minimal methods.
We make our implementations open source.1. 1.

Introduction
A cornerstone of geometric perception is finding the rel-ative pose between two images using 2D-2D point corre-spondences. It constitutes the basic building block in many structure-from-motion (SfM), visual odometry, and simulta-neous localization and mapping (SLAM) systems. Relative pose estimation is a complex problem since the relation be-tween the coordinates of the correspondences is intrinsically nonlinear and has ambiguous solutions. Also, the most nat-ural cost function, the reprojection error, is known to have many local minima. The traditional approach to estimating the relative pose between calibrated cameras passes through the essential matrix, a rank-two matrix with two identical singular values that encode the epipolar constraint between corresponding images in the two views [32].
Without information about the translation scale, the rela-tive pose problem has five degrees of freedom, and finding a solution requires at least five correspondences. Most existing 1https://github.com/armandok/QME solvers can only handle a fixed number of correspondences as input. These so-called minimal solvers are usually paired with a hypothesize-and-test framework such as RANSAC to find the maximum consensus set of inlier matches. When inliers are found, a non-minimal solver is needed to fine-tune the estimated solution and reduce the influence of noise.
Therefore, solvers’ real-time performance and low process-ing and memory requirements are essential.
This paper introduces an intuitive algebraic characteri-zation of the space of essential matrices. We show that the space of 4-D rotations with the bottom right entry set to zero double covers the space of essential matrices and uniquely encode epipolar configurations up to scale. We call such rotations quintessential matrices. We show that they share an intuitive connection with the well-known twisted-pair ambiguity, i.e., four different epipolar configurations exist for the same (unsigned) essential matrix. We also explore the relationship between quintessential matrices and unit quaternions and show that the space of two orthonormal quaternions double covers the space of quintessential matri-ces. We use these findings to present two semidefinite relax-ations of the essential matrix estimation problem and show that a Burer-Monteiro factorization of these spaces lives on Riemannian manifolds. We then design a Riemannian truncated-Newton trust-region method to solve this reduction efficiently. 2.