Abstract 4D temporal exposure dataset
Autoexposure (AE) is a critical step applied by camera systems to ensure properly exposed images. While cur-rent AE algorithms are effective in well-lit environments with constant illumination, these algorithms still struggle in environments with bright light sources or scenes with abrupt changes in lighting. A signiﬁcant hurdle in devel-oping new AE algorithms for challenging environments, es-pecially those with time-varying lighting, is the lack of suit-able image datasets. To address this issue, we have cap-tured a new 4D exposure dataset that provides a large so-lution space (i.e., shutter speed range from 1 500 to 15 sec-onds) over a temporal sequence with moving objects, bright lights, and varying lighting. In addition, we have designed a software platform to allow AE algorithms to be used in a plug-and-play manner with the dataset. Our dataset and associate platform enable repeatable evaluation of different
AE algorithms and provide a much-needed starting point to develop better AE methods. We examine several existing AE strategies using our dataset and show that most users pre-fer a simple saliency method for challenging lighting con-ditions. 1.

Introduction and Motivation
This paper is focused on auto exposure (AE) for scenes with challenging lighting. A camera’s AE subsystem is re-sponsible for determining capture-time settings to ensure a properly exposed image. Exposure is attributed to the lens aperture, shutter speed, and sensor ISO gain; however, it is often the case that some of these parameters are ﬁxed at capture time. For example, this paper focuses on the most common form of AE, known as aperture-priority AE, where the aperture (and ISO) are ﬁxed to avoid changes in the depth of ﬁeld. In aperture-priority, AE algorithms are re-sponsible for choosing the appropriate shutter speed based on information gleaned from the current captured image.
AE is inherently a dynamic process, where the algorithm
*Equal contribution.
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . . time step 0 time step 50 time step 99
Result from different AE algorithms at time step 99
Global AE
Entropy-based AE 
Saliency-based AE
Semantic-based AE
Figure 1. An example scene from our new 4D exposure dataset. A moving object (globe) has a light source that is periodically turned on and off, causing an abrupt change in lighting. Using our dataset and AE platform, we can evaluate different AE algorithms. Here we show four different AE algorithms which select different expo-sures as their solution for a particular time step. constantly predicts changes in shutter speed to account for a changing environment. While AE is a long-standing and well-researched problem in low-level computer vision, AE algorithms, including those on commercial cameras, still struggle in challenging lighting environments.
Two primary factors make scenes challenging for AE al-gorithms. The ﬁrst is when the scene’s dynamic range sur-passes the capability of the imaging sensor. In such cases, the AE algorithm must determine which part of the scene will be over- or underexposed. For this problem, it is easy to construct 3D datasets comprised of a stack of 2D images of a stationary scene captured under intense lighting with different shutter speeds. Several such exposure datasets ex-ist, providing a complete solution space with ﬁxed light-ing and objects. The second challenging factor for AE is when there is an abrupt change in the environment light-ing, such as lights switching on and off or objects moving under bright lights. Capturing datasets for this scenario is
more complicated, given the temporal nature of the chang-ing scene. To the best of our knowledge, there are no 4D datasets that provide a complete solution space over a dy-namically changing environment. This latter case is the im-petus for our work. Speciﬁcally, we have captured a 4D dataset using a stop-motion setup. Our dataset comprises nine (9) scenes, each with 100 time steps and each time step with 40 exposures. Figure 1 shows an example of a scene in our dataset. Scenes are carefully constructed to cover a range of challenging conditions, including objects moving in front of intense lights, scenes with highly reﬂective mate-rials, and scenes with rapid lighting changes. We have also developed a software platform to use with our dataset.
Our new dataset and platform allow us to evaluate var-ious AE algorithms and compare their results on precisely the same input and starting conditions (e.g., starting in an over-exposed or under-exposed condition). Figure 1 shows that different AE algorithms select notably different shutter speeds at different time steps. Given the mixed results of these methods, we performed a user study to determine the preferences of these different AE algorithms when used in challenging scenes. While our evaluation represents early work, most users preferred our AE algorithm based on a simple saliency method to determine regions of interest in the image. In the following, we detail the construction of our dataset, an API designed to allow AE algorithm test-ing, the details of the various AE algorithms tested, and the results from our user study. 2.