Abstract
In this paper, we propose a long-sequence modeling framework, named StreamPETR, for multi-view 3D object detection. Built upon the sparse query design in the PETR series, we systematically develop an object-centric tempo-ral mechanism. The model is performed in an online man-ner and the long-term historical information is propagated through object queries frame by frame. Besides, we in-troduce a motion-aware layer normalization to model the movement of the objects. StreamPETR achieves significant performance improvements only with negligible computa-tion cost, compared to the single-frame baseline. On the standard nuScenes benchmark, it is the first online multi-view method that achieves comparable performance (67.6%
NDS & 65.3% AMOTA) with lidar-based methods. The lightweight version realizes 45.0% mAP and 31.7 FPS, out-performing the state-of-the-art method (SOLOFusion) by 2.3% mAP and 1.8× faster FPS. Code has been available at https://github.com/exiawsh/StreamPETR.git. 1.

Introduction
Camera-only 3D detection is crucial for autonomous driving because of the low deployment cost and ease of de-tecting road elements. Recently, multi-view object detec-† Work done during the internship at MEGVII Technology. ‡ Corre-sponding author. tion has made remarkable progress by leveraging temporal information [27, 16, 31, 25, 39, 29]. The historical features facilitate the detection of occlusion objects and greatly im-prove the performance. According to the differences be-tween temporal representations, existing methods can be roughly divided into BEV temporal and perspective tempo-ral methods.
BEV temporal methods [27, 16, 25, 39] explicitly warp
BEV features from historical to current frame, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (a), where BEV features serve as an efficient in-termediate representation for temporal modeling. However, the highly structured BEV features limit the modeling of moving objects. This paradigm requires a large receptive field to alleviate this problem [16, 39, 27].
Different from these approaches, perspective temporal methods [31, 29] are mainly based on DETR [4, 61]. The sparse query design facilitates the modeling of moving ob-jects [29]. However, the sparse object queries need to inter-act with multi-frame image features for long-term temporal dependence (see Fig. 1 (b)), leading to multiple computa-tions. Thus, existing works are either stuck in solving the moving objects or introducing multiple computation costs.
Based on the above analysis, we suppose it is possible to employ sparse queries as the hidden states of temporal propagation. In this way, we can utilize object queries to model moving objects while keeping high efficiency. There-fore, we introduce a new paradigm: object-centric tempo-1
experiment shows that it can be well generalized to other sparse query-based methods, e.g. DETR3D [47]. 2.