Abstract
Multi-object tracking (MOT) aims to build moving tra-jectories for number-agnostic objects. Modern multi-object trackers commonly follow the tracking-by-detection strat-egy. Therefore, fooling detectors can be an effective solution but it usually requires attacks in multiple successive frames, resulting in low efficiency. Attacking association processes improves efficiency but may require model-specific design, leading to poor generalization. In this paper, we propose a novel False negative and False positive attack (F&F attack) mechanism: it perturbs the input image to erase original detections and to inject deceptive false alarms around orig-inal ones while integrating the association attack implic-itly. The mechanism can produce effective identity switches against multi-object trackers by only fooling detectors in a few frames. To demonstrate the flexibility of the mech-anism, we deploy it to three multi-object trackers (Byte-Track, SORT, and CenterTrack) which are enabled by two representative detectors (YOLOX and CenterNet). Compre-hensive experiments on MOT17 and MOT20 datasets show that our method significantly outperforms existing attack-ers, revealing the vulnerability of the tracking-by-detection paradigm to detection attacks. 1.

Introduction
As a common visual perception task, multi-object track-ing (MOT) aims to build moving trajectories for number-agnostic objects. This requires the multi-object tracker to be capable of perceiving the birth, continuation, and termination of targets. To this end, most MOT methods
[33, 22, 37, 34] follow the tracking-by-detection paradigm, working together with a detector [12, 38]. Given a new
∗Corresponding author.
Qi Ye is with the College of Control Science and Engineering and the
State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology, Zhejiang Univer-sity, and also with the Key Lab of CS&AUS of Zhejiang Province.
Project page: https://infzhou.github.io/FnFAttack/index.html
Figure 1: By erasing original detections and injecting de-ceptive false alarms around the original ones, our method misleads multi-object trackers to switch tracking identities of most targets after only attacking 1 or 2 frames. Bound-ing boxes with different colors represent different identities.
Best viewed in color. frame, the detector first finds all objects of interest. These detections are then associated with historical trajectories by various cues, like motion cues [3, 33, 37] and appearance cues [34, 29]. It has important applications in surveillance, autonomous driving, robotics [19], etc. Despite having been studied for decades and its importance, the robustness of
MOT to attacks has just gained attention in recent years.
In many other computer vision problems, numerous works have studied adversarial attacks against various visual per-ception tasks such as detection [28, 30], tracking [32, 14], semantic segmentation [30], etc since the vulnerability of deep learning models to adversarial examples is first inves-tigated in [27].
As detection is fundamental to tracking, attacking the de-tectors is a primary solution for the MOT attack. By utiliz-ing the detection attacker, Daedalus [28], to produce dense false alarms, MOT is vulnerable to the attack in tracking targets of medium sizes (discussed in our experiments) and incurs a large number of identity switches. Also, the false negative attack, by making the object invisible to the model, has shown its effectiveness in single object tracking [32].
However, Daedalus shows poor effectiveness in attacking targets with large sizes, because the sizes of predicted boxes in Daedalus are extremely compressed to evade the non-maximum suppression (NMS) process. For false negative attack, successive attacks for a long period (e.g., 30 frames) are required to delete a trajectory as MOT usually adopts a
“reserved period” [33, 34, 37] to avoid deleting a trajectory with occasional miss detections or short-term occlusions, which results in inefficient attacks.
In contrast, the Hijacking attacker [14], focuses on at-tacking the association process. It cheats the Kalman fil-ter [15] inside the tracker by shifting the original detec-tion box in a direction differing from the correct velocity, which could possibly trigger identity switches by attacking 1 frame. Despite the efficiency, it has three weaknesses. (1)
The one-on-one mapping between shifted boxes and orig-inal boxes prefers independent perturbations for attacking each target, which does not hold when simultaneously at-tacking multiple targets in the scene. (2) It needs to repeti-tively forward the association component when solving the optimal shift (to check whether the shifted box is still cor-rectly associated). (3) Poor performance in attacking multi-object trackers without Kalman filters.
To achieve both effective and efficient attacks, we pro-pose the false positive and false negative attack (F&F at-tack) mechanism, which is a complementary integration of false alarm attack, false negative attack, and the idea of the association attack. The inspiration for our attack comes from the observation that in crowded scenes, severe oc-clusions between objects and frequent changes in visibil-ity pose challenges in detection and association, leading to high probabilities of identity switches. Such challeng-ing crowded scenes are simulated in our attack by eras-ing the original detection and injecting multiple deceptive false alarms around the original one. Specifically, three de-signs are adopted to increase the threat of false alarm at-tacks against multi-object trackers. (1) Instead of extremely compressing the size of each box to achieve a higher false alarm density, we trade off lower density for larger, more deceptive false alarms. (2) We erase the original detection to ensure one of the false alarms inherits the original iden-tity, misleading association components to get incorrect es-timations (e.g., velocity estimations). (3) We adopt a shifted and scaled design for false alarms to better evade NMS and further mislead association components. Note that, with the idea of association attack being implicitly integrated, our method attacks the multi-object tracker by fooling its detec-tor component alone.
The F&F attack has the following advantages. (1) Ef-fectiveness. The one-to-many design naturally benefits the simultaneous attack on multiple targets, as it better tolerates non-independent perturbations. (2) Simplicity. Our method efficiently fools multi-object trackers without accessing or forwarding association components. (3) Flexibility. The
F&F attack is not specifically designed for attacking a cer-tain multi-object tracker. Instead, attacks against trackers enabled by the same detectors share the same design. Be-sides, since detectors often share similar components, the
F&F attack can be deployed on more detector families with minor modifications. This further broadens the scope of multi-object trackers at risk. As shown in Fig. 1, by per-turbing a few frames, our method triggers high identity switching rates on several multi-object trackers, i.e., Byte-Track [33], SORT [3], and CenterTrack [37].
To summarize, our contributions are as follows:
• We propose a novel adversarial attack mechanism to efficiently cheat multi-object trackers by erasing the injecting deceptive false alarms, original detection, and integrating the association attack implicitly.
• We show the high flexibility of the mechanism by de-ploying it to different types of multi-object trackers.
• 24 experiments are constructed for four attackers at-tacking three modern trackers (CenterTrack, SORT, and ByteTrack) on two public datasets to study the dif-ferent attacking behaviors and demonstrate the superi-ority of the proposed attack. 2.