Abstract
Aquatic species are essential components of the world’s ecosystem, and the preservation of aquatic biodiversity is crucial for maintaining proper ecosystem functioning. Un-fortunately, increasing anthropogenic pressures such as over-fishing, climate change, and coastal development pose sig-nificant threats to aquatic biodiversity. To address this chal-lenge, it is necessary to design an automatic aquatic species monitoring systems that can help researchers and policymak-ers better understand changes in aquatic ecosystems and take appropriate actions to preserve biodiversity. However, the development of such systems is impeded by a lack of large-scale diverse aquatic species datasets. Existing aquatic species recognition datasets generally have a limited num-ber of species, nor do they provide functional trait data, and so have only narrow potential for application. To address the need for generalized systems that can recognize, locate, and predict a wide array of species and their functional traits, we present FishNet, a large-scale diverse dataset containing 94,532 meticulously organized images from 17,357 aquatic species, organized according to aquatic biological taxonomy (order, family, genus, and species). We further build three benchmarks, i.e., fish classification, fish detection, and func-tional trait prediction, inspired by ecological research needs, to facilitate the development of aquatic species recognition systems, and promote further research in the field of aquatic ecology. Our FishNet dataset has the potential to encourage the development of more accurate and effective tools for the monitoring and protection of aquatic ecosystems, and hence
take effective action toward the conservation of our planet’s aquatic biodiversity. Our dataset and code will be released at https://fishnet-2023.github.io/. 1.

Introduction
Aquatic biodiversity is of paramount importance in safeguarding the structure, stability, and overall health of aquatic ecosystems. Nonetheless, in recent decades, the escalating anthropogenic pressures from human activities, including fisheries, climate change, and coastal develop-ment [22, 24, 29], have made the conservation of aquatic biodiversity increasingly difficult and increasingly promi-nent in public attention. A key step in aquatic biodiversity protection is the ongoing monitoring, which calls for highly efficient species recognition and functional trait identifica-tion [36, 39, 42]. However, this process generally calls for a high level of expert knowledge due to complicated species taxonomy, which makes it time- and labor-consuming.
In recent years, deep learning methods have made signifi-cant breakthroughs in various computer vision tasks, present-ing a promising solution for automatic and efficient species recognition. However, it is well-known that the accuracy of these AI-based models is heavily reliant on the scale and diversity of the training datasets. In the context of safeguard-ing aquatic biodiversity, there is an urgent need to develop large-scale and diverse datasets to facilitate AI-based aquatic species recognition systems. Several previous works have focused on building such datasets for fish recognition. For example, Fish4Knowledge [15] collected 27,370 fish im-ages from 23 distinct species. WildFish++ [44] collected 103,034 fish images from 2,348 species along with text de-scriptions. Other works [3, 6, 16, 17, 35] have also accumu-lated fish images from specific regions, primarily focusing on species classification. However, these datasets are limited to a relatively small proportion of the >35,000 described species of fish, posing a challenge to their application in real-world scenarios that require the recognition of diverse species. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop more extensive and diverse datasets that can enable more robust
AI-based systems to accurately identify a broader range of aquatic species, supporting aquatic biodiversity conservation efforts.
In this work, we present a large-scale diverse dataset, called FishNet, to foster aquatic species recognition research.
FishNet contains 94,532 images of aquatic species from 17,357 species, collected from different regions around the world. Please refer to Table 1 for a detailed comparison of our FishNet dataset with existing datasets. FishNet con-tains 94,532 images with different sizes, resolutions, and illumination, representing a diverse set of aquatic species.
The dataset is meticulously organized based on the scien-tific classification of aquatic species, including 8 taxonomic classes1, 83 orders, 463 families, 3826 genera, and 17,357 species, and is accompanied by manual-labeled bounding box annotations.
Our FishNet dataset also provides traits associated with each species of the dataset, which can facilitate a better un-derstanding of the ecological roles of aquatic species. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to use deep learning techniques to predict functional traits directly from fish im-ages. The proposed dataset can serve as a valuable resource for training and evaluating deep learning models for aquatic species classification and detection, and can further support research efforts toward the conservation and protection of aquatic ecosystems.
Additionally, we establish three benchmarks inspired by ecological research needs - fish classification, fish detection, and functional trait prediction, to facilitate the advancement of aquatic species recognition systems, and promote further research in the field of aquatic ecology. We conducted fish recognition and functional trait prediction using state-of-the-art deep learning models on these three benchmarks. The results show that accurate fish recognition and functional trait prediction on our FishNet dataset remains challenging: (1) The best-performing model achieved a classification accu-racy of 61.38% at the family levels, and the best-performing detection model achieved mAP50 of 56.5 at the order level. (2) For functional trait prediction, the best-performing model achieved a classification accuracy of 54.80% and 18.00% under supervised and zero-shot settings, respectively. 2.