Abstract
Existing skeleton-based action recognition methods typ-ically follow a centralized learning paradigm, which can pose privacy concerns when exposing human-related
Federated Learning (FL) has attracted much videos. attention due to its outstanding advantages in privacy-preserving. However, directly applying FL approaches to skeleton videos suffers from unstable training. In this pa-per, we investigate and discover that the heterogeneous hu-man topology graph structure is the crucial factor hinder-ing training stability. To address this limitation, we pio-neer a novel Federated Skeleton-based Action Recognition (FSAR) paradigm, which enables the construction of a globally generalized model without accessing local sensi-tive data. Specifically, we introduce an Adaptive Topol-ogy Structure (ATS), separating generalization and person-alization by learning a domain-invariant topology shared across clients and a domain-specific topology decoupled from global model aggregation. Furthermore, we explore
Multi-grain Knowledge Distillation (MKD) to mitigate the discrepancy between clients and server caused by distinct updating patterns through aligning shallow block-wise mo-tion features. Extensive experiments on multiple datasets demonstrate that FSAR outperforms state-of-the-art FL-based methods while inherently protecting privacy. 1.

Introduction
Skeleton-based action recognition is a valuable research area with widespread applications in many fields [15, 10, 43] such as human-robot interaction, intelligent security surveillance, and video understanding. Recent advance-ments in deep neural networks [41, 38] have shown signif-icant progress in learning discriminative spatial and tempo-ral features from skeleton sequences. Though successful, these methods heavily rely on massively centralizing hu-Figure 1. Illustration of Vanilla FSAR. Each client optimizes a local model with non-shared and sensitive local skeleton videos, while the server obtain a global model by aggregating local model parameters without assessing any data. The client-server collabo-rative learning is iterative to yield a global feature representation for out-of-the-box deployment with privacy protection. man skeleton videos, which directly and effectively pose privacy concerns due to the exposure of human-related in-formation, like motion patterns, behavior tendencies, and personal identity. For instance, Liao et al. [24, 23] have developed algorithms to identify individuals based on their body structures and walking styles. Therefore, centralized collection of such sensitive data exacerbates the risk of pri-vacy disclosure for each local user site. In response to the increasing awareness of personal data protection, decentral-ized training techniques are being developed, with federated learning being a powerful approach. Thus in this work, we explore the application of federated learning to skeleton-based action recognition for privacy-preserving of skeleton data, which has rarely been investigated before.
Federated Learning (FL) is a collaborative learning ap-proach that aims to collectively learn from multiple decen-tralized edge devices or clients while preserving the security and privacy of local data [30, 22]. However, many effec-tive FL techniques are image-based tasks, such as person
(a) PKU I (b) NTU 60
Figure 2. Under the federated-by-dataset scenario, directly com-bining skeleton-based action recognition tasks with FL paradigms (blue ones) suffer from training instability due to the non-IID data distribution and heterogeneous human topology graph structures. re-identification [44], medical image segmentation [8], and vision language navigation [48]. To introduce FL schemes into the skeleton-based action recognition task, we follow the standard client-server architecture [30, 12] and con-struct a vanilla Federated Skeleton-based Action Recogni-tion (Vanilla FSAR) paradigm. As shown in Fig. 1, we consider multiple local clients having independent and non-overlapping category labels. Each client is optimized with non-shared local data under the orchestration of a central server. The generalized server model is learned by aggregat-ing the local model parameters without accessing sensitive local data. Under this paradigm, vanilla FSAR optimizes a generic feature space from multiple and non-shared data silos while maintaining data privacy.
Due to the non-euclidean nature of skeleton data, Graph
Convolution Networks (GCNs) have been effective mod-els for skeleton-based tasks. One of the notable efforts is ST-GCN [46] which models spatial temporal graph of skeleton sequences based on human topology structures.
Compared to CNN- or RNN-based methods, ST-GCN and its variants [3, 19, 28] achieve superior performance on skeleton-based action recognition. Without loss of gener-ality, we apply FL approaches to the ST-GCN model via the above client-server collaboration training paradigm as the straightforward solution to address the privacy and se-curity concerns. Nevertheless, the direct combination can suffer from slow convergence and considerable fluctuations, as shown in Fig. 2, which obstructs the model from generat-ing feature representation suitable for efficient deployment with privacy protection. Apart from the non-Independently
Identically Distribution (non-IID) [47] of data from differ-ent clients, we identify the heterogeneous graph topologies across clients as a critical trigger for this phenomenon. This structured element is dataset-specific, causing local models of different clients to gradually diverge from each other dur-ing local training. It is known as the client drift in traditional
FL [13], which can drastically damage the training perfor-mance of global model when the data similarity decreases.
In light of this, we introduce FSAR, a novel bench-mark for Federated Skeleton-based Action Recognition, to address the aforementioned client drift issues, especially for skeleton data. In FSAR, instead of finding one global model that fits the data distribution of all clients, an Adap-tive Topology Structure (ATS) is proposed to inject modu-lated and customized elements into each client model. The
ATS learns the commonality of shared structure to improve the stability of FL training, and preserves the unique struc-ture of their own data to prevent current clients from be-ing affected by other clients with different dataset scales, respectively. Moreover, we adopt learnable factors to au-tomatically balance both topology structures on each client data since smaller datasets are more susceptible to large-scale datasets. Apart from this, data heterogeneity across clients caused by various source domains also jeopardize the training stability and accuracy. Generally, the features extracted by the shallower layer contain universal informa-tion (e.g., the connection between different joints), and the deeper features hold semantic information related to action labels (which is personalized and client-specific). There-fore, a Multi-grain Knowledge Distillation (MKD) mech-anism is further developed to reduce the feature variation of shallow layers, which decreases client divergences with respect to the server model and facilitates client-server com-munication on generalized messages.
By leveraging both ATS and MKD, FSAR achieves remarkable performance and provides practical solutions for federated learning in skeleton-based action recognition.
The contributions are summarized as follows:
• We pioneer in introducing FL into skeleton-based ac-tion recognition and present a novel benchmark FSAR to address privacy concerns for the first time.
• We identify the heterogeneous graph topology struc-ture as a major obstacle that causes training instability for skeleton data, and explore a novel Adaptive Topol-ogy Structure (ATS) to facilitate collaborative train-ing between decentralized clients by learning domain-invariant and domain-specific topologies.
• The innovative Multi-grain Knowledge Distillation (MKD) mechanism is then explored by aligning shal-low features to mitigate client-server divergence and further boost the accuracy.
• Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of
FSAR and demonstrate that it achieves significant im-provements over SOTA FL-based methods on several benchmark datasets with local data privacy protected. 2.