Abstract
Widely-used LiDAR-based 3D object detectors often ne-glect fundamental geometric information readily available from the object proposals in their confidence estimation.
This is mostly due to architectural design choices, which were often adopted from the 2D image domain, where geo-metric context is rarely available. In 3D, however, consid-ering the object properties and its surroundings in a holistic way is important to distinguish between true and false pos-itive detections, e.g. occluded pedestrians in a group. To address this, we present GACE, an intuitive and highly effi-cient method to improve the confidence estimation of a given black-box 3D object detector. We aggregate geometric cues of detections and their spatial relationships, which enables us to properly assess their plausibility and consequently, improve the confidence estimation. This leads to consistent performance gains over a variety of state-of-the-art detec-tors. Across all evaluated detectors, GACE proves to be especially beneficial for the vulnerable road user classes, i.e. pedestrians and cyclists. 1.

Introduction
Three-dimensional perception of surrounding objects is a critical component for autonomous vehicles and robots.
Many modern perception systems use point cloud data from
LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) sensors for this task, since they can provide accurate 3D information even over long distances. The popularity of these sensors can be seen in the increased research interest in LiDAR-based 3D object detection approaches, e.g. [10,29,38,40,45,47] and the large number of recently published autonomous driving datasets that include LiDAR data, e.g. [1, 6, 20, 33].
However, the characteristics of LiDAR data impose sig-nificant challenges for object detection. Unlike pixels in an image, which are aligned in a regular grid, point clouds rep-resent 3D data as a collection of individual points in space, each with its own set of coordinates. In addition to the un-Figure 1. Context matters: a baseline detector struggles at de-tecting true positive objects confidently if the sampling pattern is atypical, e.g. the occluded pedestrian in the orange bounding box (close-up top-left). GACE exploits the geometric properties of the detection and its surrounding objects to significantly increase the score for this detection, which is intuitively correct for a human observer considering this scene. structured nature of the data, the highly variable point den-sity poses a major challenge. Due to the angular offset of the LiDAR beams, the density is highly dependent on the distance to the object and can be altered by occlusions in the foreground. This often requires detecting objects based on very few data points, which is especially true for classes with smaller spatial dimensions, such as pedestrians and cy-clists. For example, in the Waymo Open Dataset [33], one of the most widely used and challenging datasets to date, about 30 percent of all annotated pedestrians consist of less than merely 20 points. Detecting these sparsely sensed ob-jects naturally leads to a large number of false positive de-tections at test time. For this reason, determining a mean-ingful confidence value for the detections is critical to find a trade-off between precision and recall that adequately dis-tinguishes true positives from false positives. The poten-tial that could be exploited by improving the confidence score is considerable: Suppose we have an oracle that could correctly classify the detections of a SECOND [38] model on the Waymo dataset into true and false positives. This would increase the LEVEL 1 average precision for vehicles by +3.96AP and, more importantly, for pedestrians and cy-clists by as much as +10.71AP and +13.74AP, respectively.
Existing 3D object recognition pipelines, including con-fidence estimation approaches, were largely inspired by 2D image-based object recognition models and then gradually adapted to point cloud processing. However, the conven-tional backbone - neck - head architecture of the 2D detec-tion model was largely retained, e.g. in [8, 10, 15, 27, 38, 45]. After extracting features (point-based, voxel-based, or region-based) over multiple levels in the backbone, they are fused in the neck module and then passed to the detection head, where bounding box regression and confidence es-timation are performed on a dense feature representation.
Typically, separate branches are used within the head for bounding box regression and confidence estimation, each consisting of one or more fully connected layers on top of the common feature representation.
Unlike image-based object detection, there are several highly relevant geometric properties inherent to objects in 3D point clouds that have been largely unexploited in assessing the confidence of a detection.
In the image case, it is usually not possible to easily derive geometric properties for the objects, such as height or orientation, unless a static and fully calibrated camera and a known or constant scene are given.
In contrast, in 3D object detection, many geometric features are directly available in the object properties and associated 3D data points to better assess the presence of a real object. On the one hand, these are instance-specific properties, such as the dimension of the object, the heading direction, the position, or the point distribution within the bounding box. For example, as shown in Figure 2, the precision of a SECOND [38] model for detecting a vehicle is highly dependent on the size of the object and from which side it is detected by the LiDAR.
It can be seen that vehicle categories between passenger cars and heavy duty vehicles (i.e. vehicles with a length of 6 to 13m) are harder to detect, potentially because they are underrepresented in the dataset, and that vehicles are easier to detect from behind (i.e. viewing angle between 45 degrees), presumably because of the highly reflective
± license plates, as shown in [25]. On the other hand, contex-tual properties, i.e. geometric relationships to neighboring objects, can contribute to a more reliable estimation of the confidence. For example, as shown in Figure 1, a pedestrian that appears atypical due to occlusions can be assessed more reliably by additionally taking neighboring vehicles and pedestrians into consideration.
Figure 2. Precision of a SECOND [38] model for the Waymo [33] vehicle class as a function of the object length (top) and of the viewing angle (bottom), indicating from which side the vehicle is seen by the LiDAR, where 0 degrees corresponds to the rear view.
These examples illustrate the strong dependence of the precision on simple geometric object properties.
Nevertheless, these simple but highly informative met-ric properties are neglected when estimating the confidence score in current detector architectures for the following rea-sons: First, in grid-based models, information such as the exact point distribution within the bounding box or the num-ber of points is already partially discarded by the discretiza-tion (voxelization) in the preprocessing phase. Second, the bounding box properties (object dimensions & rotation) are determined in the parallel and separate box regression head and are therefore not accessible to the confidence estimation head. Finally, confidence estimation is usually performed using only features within a small area around the object (depending on the receptive field and detector), and no ex-plicit information about neighboring objects and their geo-metric properties or confidence values is used, preventing a holistic estimation.
Inspired by these observations, we present GACE, an in-tuitive and highly effective method to improve the confi-dence estimation of any black-box detector using geometric information. Given a set of detections from the base de-tector, we explicitly use these neglected features to enhance the expressiveness of the confidence values with the help of these additional cues. Our model-agnostic approach is intentionally applied after the actual detector training pro-cess to perform an auxiliary geometric assessment inde-pendent of the initial features. In a detailed evaluation on the Waymo dataset, we show that GACE consistently im-proves the performance of several state-of-the-art detection pipelines. Furthermore, we demonstrate the generalizabil-ity and transferability of our method by applying it to other datasets and even other detectors. Without retraining them, we achieve highly compelling performance gains.
2.