Abstract
Instance segmentation on 3D point clouds (3DIS) is a longstanding challenge in computer vision, where state-of-the-art methods are mainly based on full supervision. As annotating ground truth dense instance masks is tedious and expensive, solving 3DIS with weak supervision has become more practical. In this paper, we propose GaPro, a new in-stance segmentation for 3D point clouds using axis-aligned 3D bounding box supervision. Our two-step approach in-volves generating pseudo labels from box annotations and training a 3DIS network with the resulting labels. Addi-tionally, we employ the self-training strategy to improve the performance of our method further. We devise an effec-tive Gaussian Process to generate pseudo instance masks from the bounding boxes and resolve ambiguities when they overlap, resulting in pseudo instance masks with their un-certainty values. Our experiments show that GaPro outper-forms previous weakly supervised 3D instance segmenta-tion methods and has competitive performance compared to state-of-the-art fully supervised ones. Furthermore, we demonstrate the robustness of our approach, where we can adapt various state-of-the-art fully supervised methods to the weak supervision task by using our pseudo labels for train-ing. The source code and trained models are available at https://github.com/VinAIResearch/GaPro. 1.

Introduction
This paper addresses the challenging problem of box-supervised 3D point cloud instance segmentation (BS-3DIS), which seeks to segment every point into instances of prede-fined classes using only axis-aligned 3D bounding boxes as supervision during training. This problem arises to address the huge annotating cost of fully-supervised 3D point cloud instance segmentation (3DIS) where every point in the point cloud is manually labeled. Compared to 3DIS, BS-3DIS is considered significantly harder. First, axis-aligned boxes cannot capture the shape or geometry of objects as they only represent the very coarse extent of the objects. Second, un-like instance mask where points only belong to at most one
Figure 1: Weakly supervised instance segmentation relies on high-quality pseudo labels to achieve competitive perfor-mance. Given only axis-aligned bounding box annotations, pseudo labels based on heuristics [5] often have large errors in box overlapping regions and thus yield inferior perfor-mance. Our GaPro predicts the pseudo labels and their confi-dence using Gaussian Processes, via resolving the ambiguity in box overlapping regions. mask, points can belong to multiple boxes as visualized in
Fig. 1, resulting in the ambiguous point-object assignment.
The task of box-supervised 3D point cloud instance seg-mentation has received little attention, with Box2Mask [5] being the first attempt. However, due to the ambiguity in point-object assignments, the point-wise predicted boxes are unreliable for clustering. This leads to a significant per-formance gap compared to fully supervised methods, such as Mask3D [33], which achieves an mAP of 55.2 on Scan-NetV2 [6], compared to Box2Mask’s 39.1 (around 30%) using the same backbone. Furthermore, Box2Mask is not adaptable to new advances in fully supervised 3DIS, as it is designed as a standalone method.
To address these limitations, we propose a novel pseudo-labeling method that can be used as a universal plugin for any 3DIS network and offers an instant solution for any new fully supervised 3DIS approach, with a smaller performance gap between fully supervised and BS-3DIS versions, typically
around 10%. In particular, we formulate it as a learning prob-lem with two unknowns: the network’s parameters and the ground-truth object masks. Our goal is to construct pseudo object masks from box supervision and optimize the net-work’s parameters using these pseudo labels. To achieve this, we propose using Gaussian Process (GP) on each pair of overlapping 3D bounding boxes to infer the optimal pseudo labels of object masks and their uncertainty values, which are constrained by the given 3D bounding boxes. Next, we modify a 3DIS network to predict additional uncertainty val-ues along with the object mask to match the inferred pseudo labels obtained from the GP. GP plays a key role in our ap-proach. First, it models the similarity relationship among regions of the point cloud, which enables effective label propagation from determined regions (belonging to a single box) to undetermined regions (belonging to multiple boxes).
Second, it estimates the uncertainty of the predictions with weak labels, providing informative indications for annotators to correct uncertain regions of pseudo labels for training the 3D instance segmentation network.
We evaluate our approach on various state-of-the-art 3DIS methods, including PointGroup [19], SSTNet [26], Soft-Group [40], ISBNet [30], and SPFormer [36], using two challenging datasets: ScanNetV2 [6] and S3DIS [1]. Our box-supervised versions of these methods achieve compa-rable performance to their fully-supervised counterparts on both datasets, outperforming other weakly-supervised 3DIS methods significantly.
In summary, the contributions of our work are as follows:
• We propose GaPro, a weakly-supervised 3DIS method based on 3D bounding box supervision. We devise a systematic approach to generate pseudo object masks from 3D axis-aligned bounding boxes so that fully su-pervised 3DIS methods can be retargeted for weak su-pervision purposes.
• We propose an efficient Gaussian Process to resolve the ambiguity of pseudo labels in the overlapped region of two or more bounding boxes by inferring both the pseudo masks and their uncertainty values.
• Our GaPro achieves competitive performance with the
SOTA fully-supervised approaches and outperforms other weakly-supervised methods by a large margin on both ScanNetV2 and S3DIS datasets.
In the following, Sec. 2 reviews prior work; Sec. 3 speci-fies GaPro; and Sec. 4 presents our implementation details and experimental results. Sec. 5 concludes with some re-marks and discussions. 2.