Abstract
We present a novel 2-point method for estimating the relative pose of a camera undergoing planar motion from 3D data (e.g. from a calibrated stereo setup or an RGB-D sensor). Unlike prior art, our formulation does not as-sume knowledge of the plane of motion, (e.g. parallelism between the optical axis and motion plane) to resolve the under-constrained nature of SE(3) motion estimation in this context. Instead, we enforce geometric constraints identify-ing, in closed-form, a unique planar motion solution from an orbital set of geometrically consistent SE(3) motion es-timates. We explore the set of special and degenerate geo-metric cases arising from our formulation. Experiments on synthetic data characterize the sensitivity of our estimation framework to measurement noise and different types of ob-served motion. We integrate our solver within a RANSAC framework and demonstrate robust operation on standard benchmark sequences of real-world imagery. Code is avail-able at: https://github.com/jdibenes/gpm. 1.

Introduction
Pose estimation is a basic geometric perception task cru-cial to multiple computer vision and robotic applications such as 3D modeling [9], image registration [22], object pose estimation [24], visual odometry [23], and simultane-ous localization and mapping (SLAM) [21]. The problem is generally formulated as the estimation of the parameters of a motion-model representation (i.e. SE(2) or SE(3)) that satisfies a given image formation model and a set of input observations [8]. From a geometric perspective, the 2D and 3D variants of the absolute orientation problem (i.e. finding the rigid motion among two sets of corresponding points expressed in different Euclidean coordinate systems), are perhaps the most straightforward and well-known.
The use of constrained planar motion models allows to reduce data requirements and enforce structured geometric priors onto the estimates (e.g. non-holonomic constraints applicable to robotic vehicle platforms). For such cases, the desired estimate may be geometrically represented as
Axis of rotation
PA
PB
τ2
Motion plane
Translation
τ1
Figure 1. Planar motion is common to mobile platforms traversing locally flat terrain such as the KITTI [10] (left) and TUM [34] (right) benchmarks. Our method operates on 3D feature inputs, possibly attained through stereo triangulation or depth sensors, to estimate planar motion without any priors on the motion plane. an element of SE(2) defined on a 2D plane embedded in
Euclidean 3-space. Surprisingly, the task of jointly estimat-ing a completely unknown embedding motion plane, as well as the corresponding SE(2) motion parameters, remains an open research problem.
Our geometric formulation assumes the availability of a pair of correspondences among local (i.e. camera-space) 3D points attained from RGB-D inputs (e.g. active/passive stereo, time-of-flight sensors, view-registered lidar). Per the discussion in Horn’s classic work [16], such input under-constrains the estimation of the general SE(3) transforma-tion relating the 3D coordinates. Our formulation disam-biguates among the ensuing 1D family of solutions in gen-eral SE(3) by enforcing compliance to a general planar mo-tion (i.e. SE(2)) model through a straightforward geomet-ric constraint: orthogonality between the translation com-ponent and the rotation axis.
Our framework defines the geometry of the set of possi-ble SE(3) solutions, and explicitly models the 1D paramet-ric dependency for both general motion components (i.e. 3D rotation and translation) to derive a closed-form solu-tion yielding the unique SE(3) element satisfying the gen-eral planar motion assumption. The technical contributions and differentiators of our work are: 1. Simplicity. We develop a minimal and purely geomet-ric first-order analytic solution defined over linear vec-tor operations and trigonometric functions instead of root-searching over higher-order polynomial terms. 2. Generality. Our formulation makes no assumptions the ground motion on the camera disposition w.r.t. plane, making it suitable for deployment in capture rigs with unknown (but constant) configuration. 3. Interpretability. By virtue of its explicit geomet-ric parameterization, our formulation can summarily identify and robustly estimate special motion instances such as pure rotation and/or translation. 2.