Abstract
We present a learning-based method, namely GeoUDF, to tackle the long-standing and challenging problem of re-constructing a discrete surface from a sparse point cloud.
To be specific, we propose a geometry-guided learning method for UDF and its gradient estimation that explic-itly formulates the unsigned distance of a query point as the learnable affine averaging of its distances to the tan-gent planes of neighboring points on the surface. Besides, we model the local geometric structure of the input point clouds by explicitly learning a quadratic polynomial for each point. This not only facilitates upsampling the in-put sparse point cloud but also naturally induces unori-ented normal, which further augments UDF estimation. Fi-nally, to extract triangle meshes from the predicted UDF we propose a customized edge-based marching cube mod-ule. We conduct extensive experiments and ablation stud-ies to demonstrate the significant advantages of our method over state-of-the-art methods in terms of reconstruction ac-curacy, efficiency, and generality. The source code is pub-licly available at https://github.com/rsy6318/GeoUDF. 1.

Introduction
Surface reconstruction from point clouds is a funda-mental and challenging problem in 3D vision, graphics and robotics [17, 27, 9]. Traditional approaches, such as
Poisson surface reconstruction [18], compute an occupancy or signed distance field (SDF) by solving Poisson’s equa-tion, resulting in a sparse line system. Then they utilize the Marching Cubes (MC) [23] algorithm to extract iso-surfaces as the reconstructed meshes. These methods are computationally efficient, scalable, resilient to noise and
*Corresponding author. This work was supported by the Hong Kong
Research Grants Council under Grant 11202320, Grant 11219422, and
Grant 11218121. tolerant to registration artifacts. However, they work only for oriented point samples. Recent developments in deep learning have demonstrated that implicit fields, such as bi-nary occupancy fields (BOFs) and signed distance fields (SDFs), can be learned directly from raw point clouds, mak-ing them a promising tool for reconstructing surfaces from unoriented point samples.
Although BOFs and SDFS are effective at reconstruct-ing watertight and manifold surfaces, they have limitations when it comes to representing more general types of sur-faces, such as those with open boundaries or interior struc-tures. In contrast, the unsigned distance field (UDF) is more powerful in terms of representation ability, and can over-come the above-mentioned limitations of BOFs and SDFs.
The existing deep UDF-based methods, such as [11, 39, 16], employ neural networks to regress UDFs from input point clouds. Due to their reliance on the training data, these methods have limited generalizability and cannot deal with unseen objects well. Another technical challenge diminish-ing UDFs’ practical usage is that one cannot use the conven-tional MC to extract iso-surfaces directly because UDFs do not have zero-crossings and thus do not provide the required sign-change information of inside or outside. Some meth-ods [16, 41] locally convert a UDF to an SDF in a cubic cell and then apply MC to extract the surface. However, they often fail at corners or edges. Recently, GIFS [39] modifies
MC by predicting whether the surface interacts with each cube edge via a neural network.
In this paper, we propose GeoUDF, a new learning-based framework reconstructing the underlying surface of a sparse point cloud. We particularly aim at addressing two fundamental issues of UDFs, namely, (1) how to predict an accurate UDF and its gradients for arbitrary 3D inputs? and (2) how to extract triangle meshes, given a UDF? More im-portantly, the constructed methods should be well general-ized to unseen data. To solve the first issue, we propose a geometry-guided learning module, adaptively approximat-ing the UDF and its gradient of a point cloud by leveraging
its local geometry in a decoupled manner. As for the second issue, we propose an edge-based MC algorithm, extracting triangle mesh from any UDF according to the intersection relationship between the surface and the connections of any two vertices of the cubes. In addition, we propose to en-hance input point cloud quality by explicitly and concisely modeling its local geometry structure, which is beneficial for surface reconstruction. The elegant formulations distin-guish our GeoUDF from existing methods, making it more lightweight, efficient, and accurate and better generalizabil-ity. Besides, the proposed modules contained in GeoUDF can be independently used as a general method in its own right. Extensive experiments on various datasets show the significant superiority of our method over state-of-the-art methods.
In summary, the main contributions of this paper are three-fold:
• novel accurate, compact, efficient, and explainable learning-based UDF and its gradient estimation meth-ods that are decoupled;
• a concise yet effective learning-based point cloud up-sampling and representation method; and
• a general method for extracting triangle meshes from any unsigned distance field. 2.