Abstract 1.

Introduction
Video nystagmography (VNG) is the diagnostic gold standard of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV), which requires medical professionals to examine the direc-tion, frequency, intensity, duration, and variation in the strength of nystagmus on a VNG video. This is a te-dious process heavily influenced by the doctor’s experience, which is error-prone. Recent automatic VNG classifica-tion methods approach this problem from the perspective of video analysis without considering medical prior knowl-edge, resulting in unsatisfactory accuracy and limited di-agnostic capability for nystagmographic types, thereby pre-venting their clinical application. In this paper, we propose an end-to-end data-driven novel BPPV diagnosis frame-work (TC-BPPV) by considering this problem as an eye trajectory classification problem due to the disease’s symp-toms and experts’ prior knowledge.
In this framework, we utilize an eye movement tracking system to capture the eye trajectory and propose the Gram-based attentive neu-ral ordinary differential equations network (Gram-AODE) to perform classification. We validate our framework us-ing the VNG dataset provided by the collaborative univer-sity hospital and achieve state-of-the-art performance. We also evaluate Gram-AODE on multiple open-source bench-marks to demonstrate its effectiveness in trajectory classi-fication. Code is available at https://github.com/
XiheQiu/Gram-AODE.
*Equal contribution
†Corresponding author
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) is a clas-sic type of otogenic vertigo, which is transitory dizziness caused by head movements to a certain position with high prevalence (i.e, the lifetime prevalence of 2.4%) [46]. The characterization of nystagmus in individuals with BPPV is crucial for the diagnosis of BPPV. In clinical practice, in-formation on nystagmus is typically obtained through posi-tional testing and the type of BPPV condition can be deter-mined by irregular rhythmic eye movements, consisting of nystagmus and eye-twisting movements [44]. Video Nys-tagmography (VNG) can significantly improve the detec-tion rate of BPPV nystagmus [27]. According to the type of nystagmus movement, medical professionals might classify
BPPV into different types of therapy. However, distinguish-ing the different disorders can be a challenging task. During diagnosis, the medical professional must examine the VNG video for nystagmus features such as direction, frequency, intensity, duration, and intensity variation, which is time-consuming and error-prone.
Recent research has demonstrated the success of using deep learning to comprehend human behavior in the video, and automatically classify VNG for BPPV analysis based on relevant image [29, 3] or time-series features [18]. How-ever, these models are proposed from the perspective of video analysis without explicitly considering the disease symptoms and pathology, which provide sufficient classi-fication types in clinical practice.
Therefore, we propose a novel end-to-end data-driven framework to perform BPPV diagnosis by considering this problem as an eye Trajectory Classification (TC-BPPV) problem due to the disease’s symptoms and experts’ prior knowledge. This framework can classify the BPPV into ten classes which are commonly recognized in clinical prac-tice. In this framework, we first simplify the complex video
analysis into a trajectory classification task through the eye movement tracking technique. This is achieved by retriev-ing the pupil center for every nystagmus video in the dataset using the contour detection algorithm [6] and the Hough cir-cle transformation algorithm to produce pupil coordinates
[2]. This process dramatically reduces the feature learn-ing space by following the typical clinical diagnosis prior knowledge, whereas the pupil movement trajectory is one of the strongest diagnosis evidence [16].
Then, we perform classification through a Gram-based
Attentive neural Ordinary Differential Equations network (Gram-AODE). We regularize the obtained coordinates to the Gram matrix through a carefully designed production process. This process not only ensures the preservation of the translation equivariant property which is coherent with clinical diagnosis, but also provides detailed relational information in the feature map and overcomes intricate temporal patterns. Subsequently, we process the acquired feature map through a neural ordinary differential equa-tions (ODEs) network to explicitly consider the continuous changes between the trajectory points and implicitly model the underlying dynamics of eye movement. The ablation studies also show that the discrete residual network is inef-fective to process the feature image due to the difficulty of choosing the specific number of residual layers, which also supports our utilization of neural ODEs with their superior adaptive resolution capability. Finally, we employ an atten-tion mechanism to perform feature integration in the hidden feature space and output the final classification results. The overview framework is illustrated in Figure 1.
To fully evaluate our proposed framework, we first con-duct a comprehensive evaluation of TC-BPPV on the clini-cal dataset provided by the collaborative university hospital.
This dataset consists of real patients’ VNG videos that are manually labeled by medical professionals. Due to the tra-jectory classification nature of our proposed Gram-AODE method, we also evaluate the method on several publicly ac-cessible trajectory classification benchmarks to demonstrate its effectiveness. Based on the experiment results, our pro-posed TC-BPPV can perform clinical BPPV diagnosis in an end-to-end data-driven manner with human expert-level accuracy. The Gram-AODE method also consistently out-performs some existing state-of-the-art baseline approaches in some open-source trajectory classification benchmarks.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• We present TC-BPPV through eye trajectory classifi-cation, which is end-to-end and data-driven. Accord-ing to our knowledge, we are the first to handle the challenging VNG classification as a time-series trajec-tory classification problem for BPPV diagnosis using machine learning techniques.
• Our proposed model explicitly leverages the induc-tive bias based on the disease’s symptoms and experts’ prior knowledge. We consider the BPPV as eye trajec-tory classification and express the translation equivari-ant property of the point set.
• We develop a Gram-based attentive neural ordinary differential equations network (Gram-AODE) to per-form time-series trajectory classification. This method can overcome intricate temporal patterns and learn the points’ inner relation with underlying dynamics in a higher dimensional space to provide an accurate pre-diction.
• We conduct rigorous evaluations of TC-BPPV on the clinical dataset provided by the collaborative univer-sity hospital. The results indicate high feasibility in clinical practice. We also test Gram-AODE in sev-eral open-source trajectory classification benchmarks, which demonstrate state-of-the-art performance. 2.