Abstract
Learning implicit representations has been a widely used solution for surface reconstruction from 3D point cloud-s. The latest methods infer a distance or occupancy ﬁeld by overﬁtting a neural network on a single point cloud.
However, these methods suffer from a slow inference due to the slow convergence of neural networks and the exten-sive calculation of distances to surface points, which lim-its them to small scale points. To resolve the scalabili-ty issue in surface reconstruction, we propose GridPull to improve the efﬁciency of learning implicit representations from large scale point clouds. Our novelty lies in the fast inference of a discrete distance ﬁeld deﬁned on grids with-out using any neural components. To remedy the lack of continuousness brought by neural networks, we introduce a loss function to encourage continuous distances and con-sistent gradients in the ﬁeld during pulling queries onto the surface in grids near to the surface. We use unifor-m grids for a fast grid search to localize sampled queries, and organize surface points in a tree structure to speed up the calculation of distances to the surface. We do not re-ly on learning priors or normal supervision during opti-mization, and achieve superiority over the latest method-s in terms of complexity and accuracy. We evaluate our method on shape and scene benchmarks, and report numer-ical and visual comparisons with the latest methods to justi-fy our effectiveness and superiority. The code is available at https://github.com/chenchao15/GridPull. 1.

Introduction
It is vital to reconstruct surfaces from 3D point clouds for downstream applications. A widely used strategy is to learn (cid:3)The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu. This work was supported by National Key R&D Program of China (2022YFC3800600), the Nation-al Natural Science Foundation of China (62272263, 62072268), and in part by Tsinghua-Kuaishou Institute of Future Media Data. implicit representations [59, 62, 26, 10, 91, 77, 54, 68, 88] from 3D point clouds in a data-driven manner. With the learned implicit representations, we can reconstruct sur-faces in meshes by running the marching cubes algorith-m [48]. By learning priors from large scale datasets during training, previous methods [57, 21, 31, 46, 78, 73, 17] gen-eralize the learned priors to either global implicit function-s [89, 80, 8, 32, 6, 50] or local ones for unseen point cloud-s. However, the generalization ability limits their perfor-mances on large structure or geometry variations of training samples.
More recent methods [23, 12, 2, 100, 3, 95, 4, 49, 14, 65, 35] achieved better generalization by directly overﬁt-ting neural networks on single unseen point clouds. They rely on extensive calculations of distances between queries and surface points to probe the space, which supervises neural networks to converge to a distance or occupancy
ﬁeld [49, 23, 2, 100, 3, 11, 52, 83, 40]. However, this in-ference procedure is time consuming due to the extensive distance calculations and the slow convergence of neural networks. This demerit makes these methods hard to scale up to large scale point clouds for surface reconstruction.
To address the scalability challenge, we propose Grid-Pull to speed up the learning of implicit function from large scale point clouds. GridPull does not require learned priors or point normal, and directly infers a distance ﬁeld from a point cloud without using any neural components. We infer the distance ﬁeld on grids near the surface, which reduces the number of grids we need to infer. Moreover, we orga-nize surface points in a tree structure to speed up the nearest neighbor search for the calculation of distances to the sur-face. Speciﬁcally, we infer the discrete distance ﬁeld by pulling queries onto the surface in grids of interests. Our loss function encourages continuous distances and consis-tent gradients in the ﬁeld, which makes up the lack of con-tinuousness brought by neural networks. We justify our ef-fectiveness and highlight our superiority by numerical and visual comparisons with the latest methods on the widely used benchmarks. Our contributions are listed below.
i) We propose GridPull to reconstruct surfaces from large scale point clouds without using neural network-s. GridPull speeds up the learning of implicit function, which addresses the scalability challenge in surface re-construction. ii) We introduce a loss function to directly infer a discrete distance ﬁeld deﬁned on grids but achieving continu-ous distances and consistent gradients in the ﬁeld. iii) Our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods in surface reconstruction in terms of speed and accuracy on the widely used benchmarks. 2.