Abstract
We present the first active learning tool for fine-grained 3D part labeling, a problem which challenges even the most advanced deep learning (DL) methods due to the signifi-cant structural variations among the intricate parts. For the same reason, the necessary effort to annotate training data is tremendous, motivating approaches to minimize human involvement. Our labeling tool iteratively verifies or mod-ifies part labels predicted by a deep neural network, with human feedback continually improving the network predic-tion. To effectively reduce human efforts, we develop two novel features in our tool, hierarchical and symmetry-aware active labeling. Our human-in-the-loop approach, coined
HAL3D, achieves close to error-free fine-grained annota-tions on any test set with pre-defined hierarchical part la-bels, with 80% time-saving over manual effort. We will re-lease the finely labeled models to serve the community. 1.

Introduction
Semantic shape segmentation and labeling [8, 27] is a classical problem with numerous applications [18], includ-ing shape/part recognition, retrieval, indexing, and attribute transfer. We consider the problem of fine-grained 3D part labeling, a task that has not received as much attention as the typical semantic segmentation into coarse/major parts (e.g., backs, seats, and legs for chairs). While these coarse semantic groups support high-level visual perception, they do not possess sufficient granularity to address shape prop-erties related to motion, function, interaction, or construc-tion. Indeed, fine-grained object parts, e.g., the individual wheels and the small mechanical parts in a swivel leg, are both function-revealing and build-aware (see Fig. 1), with strong ties to how the objects were physically assembled or virtually built by artists. Real-world applications such as product inspection, assembly, customization, and robot in-teraction all operate on fine-grained object parts.
Learning to label fine-grained parts is a highly challeng-ing problem due to the great structural variations among the small and intricate parts, even for shapes that belong to the same category, as shown in Fig. 1. On a challenging
Figure 1. Fine-grained parts of the 3D models shown exhibit the kind of geometric and structural complexity and diversity that part labeling has to handle. No existing methods, whether learned or heuristic-based, could obtain close-to-fully-accurate labeling in these challenging cases, while our human-in-the-loop active learn-ing tool can approach full accuracy, barring human errors. dataset with average part counts per category ranging from 15 to more than 500, state-of-the-art learned models such as [33] can only achieve mean IoU scores below 50%, out of a maximum of 100% for ground truth (GT) results. Also challenging is the tremendous data annotation effort needed to train methods to segment and label fine-grained parts. On the other hand, for applications which demand de facto full accuracy, e.g., for diagnoses in medicine and quality assur-ance in e-commerce, one can hardly rely on a fully auto-matic method to reach the mark. It is arguable that the only means to attain full accuracy is to have humans validate all the results, as in the case of data annotation.
In this paper, we present the first active learning tool for fine-grained 3D part labeling. Given a set of 3D shapes segmented into fine parts, our labeling tool assigns one of the predefined labels to each part. These input parts are deemed atomic (i.e., indivisible); they can be as low-level as mesh triangles and as high-level as results obtained by an unlabelled semantic segmentation, or mid-level components from an over-segmentation. In general, active learning iter-ates between automated labeling and human input for label rectification [44]. Compared to conventional learned mod-els with full autonomy, such a human-in-the-loop approach provides a viable option to achieve close to error-free part labeling on test sets, barring human errors1.
*Work carried out during internship at Amazon. 1During testing, accuracy is measured against GT labeling which has
Figure 2. Our human-in-the-loop, hierarchical active learning (HAL3D) tool for fine-grained 3D part labeling. The input consists of a set of test shapes each pre-segmented into parts. The labeling proceeds hierarchically, following a tree structure (left) that organizes the hierarchical part labels, from coarse labels (top) to fine-grained labels (bottom). For a node in the label tree (with label l = “Regular Leg
Base” in the illustration), the input I0 is the subset of parts, from the entire set of shapes, that are labeled l by its parent. When labeling parts with l, the label proposal module first assigns refined labels for each part. Then, proposals are sorted by the mean label probability over the parts of each shape, with the high-confidence (HC) proposals passed to the verification step, which stops once the rate of failed shapes reaches a threshold. The low-confidence (LC) proposals are passed to the label modification module. Correctly labeled shapes fine-tune the network, while skipped and failed shapes, in set I1, go to the next iteration for labeling. The iterations terminate when all shapes have passed human validation.
As shown in Fig. 2, our interactive labeling tool itera-tively verifies or modifies part labels predicted by a deep neural network, with human feedback continually improv-ing the network prediction. Specifically, our system consists of three modules for label proposal, verification, and mod-ification. Label proposals are produced by dynamic graph
CNN (DGCNN) [37], with the resulting label probabilities dictating whether to pass the predicted labels to the veri-fication or modification module. Both human-verified and corrected labels are passed back to the label proposal net-work to fine-tune it. The iteration terminates once all part labels have passed human verification.
As the key criterion for success with active learning is the minimization of human effort, we design and incorporate two novel features into our labeling tool:
• Hierarchical labeling: We organize all the part la-bels in a hierarchical tree structure, which guides our prediction-verification-modification process so that la-bels further down in the hierarchy are dealt with only after their parent labels have been fully verified. This leads to labeling efficiency, since our labeling process is coarse-to-fine, with fewer labels to process in the coarser levels of the hierarchy. In addition, with both been produced by humans. To achieve full accuracy, two criteria must be met: (a) the testing human labeler’s judgement of what is the correct label-ing agrees with the GT; (b) the labeler does not make any error, e.g., due to carelessness or time pressure. We regard both types of violations as “hu-man errors.” One may also refer to the former as an inconsistency between human labeling, which is likely to occur near fuzzy part boundaries. human users and the prediction network only needing to deal with labels at the same level of the hierarchy rather than across all levels, there is less load on the users to reduce possible errors and the prediction ac-curacy improves, which reduces the amount of label modifications, which are the most expensive task.
• Part symmetry: Since symmetric parts receive the same label, we employ detected symmetries to constrain and facilitate both label verification and modification.
Our hierarchical active learning tool is coined HAL3D.
We adopt the hierarchical labels from PartNet [20] and train and test our labeling tool on both PartNet, which comes with semantic part segmentations, and Amazon-Berkeley Ob-jects (ABO). ABO is a recently published dataset of high-quality, artist-created 3D models of real products sold on-line. These models are composed of build-aware connected components, However, since some of these components are too coarse, we first obtain an over-segmentation via convex decomposition [39] and then apply HAL3D.
We evaluate the core components of HAL3D, i.e., the la-bel proposal network being fine-tuned by human feedback, and both hierarchical and symmetry-aware active labeling, by comparing to baselines and performing an ablation. The results demonstrate clear efficiency of HAL3D over label-ing tools without active learning and non-hierarchical de-signs. Overall, HAL3D achieves 80% speed-up over man-ual fine-grained labeling, on the PartNet test set. A supple-mentary video shows our interactive tool at work. We will
release the finely labeled ABO models to serve the commu-nity pending permission from the dataset owner. 2.