Abstract
The existing one-stage multi-object tracking (MOT) al-gorithms have achieved satisfactory performance beneﬁt-ing from a large amount of labeled data. However, acquir-ing plenty of laborious annotated frames is not practical in real applications. To reduce the cost of human anno-tations, we propose Heterogeneous Diversity driven Active
Multi-Object Tracking (HD-AMOT), to infer the most infor-mative frames for any MOT tracker by observing the hetero-geneous cues of samples. HD-AMOT deﬁnes the diversiﬁed informative representation by encoding the geometric and semantic information, and formulates the frame inference strategy as a Markov decision process to learn an optimal sampling policy based on the designed informative repre-sentation. Speciﬁcally, HD-AMOT consists of a diversiﬁed informative representation module as well as an informa-tive frame selection network. The former produces the sig-nal characterizing the diversity and distribution of frames, and the latter receives the signal and conducts multi-frame cooperation to enable batch frame sampling. Extensive ex-periments conducted on the MOT15, MOT17, MOT20, and
Dancetrack datasets demonstrate the efﬁcacy and effective-ness of HD-AMOT. Experiments show that under 50% bud-get our HD-AMOT can achieve similar or even higher per-formance as fully-supervised learning. 1.

Introduction
As a sophisticated research topic, one-stage multi-object tracking (MOT) has attracted more research attention in re-cent years, which simultaneously focuses on pinpointing multiple objects in each frame and recording their trajecto-ries in the entire sequence. Despite the great success of deep learning-based one-stage MOT methods [25, 48, 27, 26, 52, 6, 22], they need a large amount of annotated samples for training, which requires costly human labor. For example,
*Work done when Rui Li was an visiting student of SUTD.
†Zhu Teng is the corresponding author (zteng@bjtu.edu.cn).
Frame: 365
Frame: 366
Frame: 367
Frame: 368
…
State 1: Moving
State 2: Static
Figure 1. A stimulus example of active learning for one-stage
MOT. There are many similar continuous frames in tracking se-quences, such as frames 365-368 of MOT17-02 [23], and fully annotated these frames may have little effect on improving the per-formance of the tracker. Moreover, objects usually have different states, such as moving and static states, as shown in the red dotted box. The moving states usually contain more knowledge than the static ones, in which case the uniform and random sampling may fail to capture the diverse visual patterns of tracking sequences. in the MOT17 dataset [23], a sequence containing only 600 frames requires annotating 18,581 bounding boxes (includ-ing coordinates and identity labels) for 62 pedestrians. In addition, there are many similar continuous frames in track-ing sequences, such as frames 365-368 of the MOT17-02 sequence in Fig. 1, which may have little effect on boost-ing the performance of the tracker. One way to deal with the above issue is to randomly or uniformly sample track-ing sequences for annotation. However, as shown in the red dotted box of Fig. 1, objects in tracking sequences may have different motion states, and the moving state contains more knowledge than the static state, in which case the uni-form sampling may fail to capture diverse visual patterns.
Moreover, random sampling is easy to yield unstable re-sults. Therefore, it is essential to develop algorithms to infer training data more efﬁciently in one-stage MOT.
Instead of selecting the subset randomly or uniformly,
active learning (AL) aims to infer the most informative sam-ples as training data to improve the knowledge of a model, which is a promising way to select training data more efﬁ-ciently for one-stage MOT. In the computer vision area, ac-tive learning has been widely explored for image classiﬁca-tion [3, 21, 1, 8], object detection [45, 44, 10], semantic seg-mentation [1, 7, 28, 9], and so on. In these research topics, the image selection strategies of uncertainty-based [32, 42] and distribution-based methods [31, 1] become the main-stream of active learning. However, these AL algorithms do not directly relate to the performance improvements of the speciﬁc task and usually lead to suboptimal performance.
More notably, they are usually utilized to select independent image samples, which are prone to achieve poor coverage of the tracking sequence and produce redundant frames if they are employed to the one-stage MOT task stifﬂy and directly.
In particular, since new individuals appear constantly in the tracking sequence, the distribution bias caused by the poor coverage and redundant frames may make the tracker un-able to generalize well for unseen cases.
Furthermore, different from other tasks that distinguish inter-class objects in each image (such as image classiﬁca-tion, object detection, etc.), one-stage MOT needs to detect and associate intra-class objects, e.g., pedestrians belonging to different individuals. This implies that the active learning for one-stage MOT is more challenging, because it should consider not only the discrepancy between frame-level im-ages, but also the inﬂuence of more ﬁne-grained intra-class diversity in sample selection, which plays a vital role in ob-ject association in one-stage MOT.
To address the above issues, we formulate the active learning of one-stage MOT as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) [36] and design a novel Heterogeneous Diversity driven Active Multi-Object Tracking (HD-AMOT) frame-work, which leverages a Diversiﬁed Informative Represen-tation Module (DIRM) and an Informative Frame Selection
Network (IFSN) to learn a frame sampling policy. Speciﬁ-cally, IFSN is designed to infer a batch of informative and diverse frames for annotation by receiving the signal char-acterizing the diversity and distribution of frames and con-ducting multi-frame cooperation, which can effectively in-hibit poor coverage and reduce redundant frames.
In ad-dition, to facilitate the inference of benignant frames, we develop a novel DIRM to characterize the frame-level diver-siﬁed representation of samples by encoding the geometric and semantic cues of frames and objects. Besides the frame-level diversity representation, we also evaluate the set-level (labeled set and unlabeled set) discrepancy in DIRM, which dedicates to the acquirement of the training set with the un-biased distribution.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows: (1)
We propose a novel HD-AMOT for one-stage MOT, which is formulated as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) and learns a sampling policy driven by the reward that directly relates to the tracker performance. To the best of our knowl-edge, this is the ﬁrst work that investigates the annotation budget for one-stage MOT based on active learning. (2) To infer the benignant frames, we design a diversiﬁed informa-tive representation to characterize the diversity and distribu-tion of frames, which learns both the set-level discrepancy and frame-level diversity by encoding the heterogeneous cues of geometry and semantics. (3) Extensive experiments are conducted on four datasets to demonstrate the efﬁcacy and effectiveness of HD-AMOT. Experiments show that our
HD-AMOT can achieve similar or even higher performance as fully-supervised learning under 50% annotation budget. 2.