Abstract
Impressive performance on point cloud semantic seg-mentation has been achieved by fully-supervised methods with large amounts of labelled data. As it is labour-intensive to acquire large-scale point cloud data with point-wise labels, many attempts have been made to explore learning 3D point cloud segmentation with limited anno-tations. Active learning is one of the effective strategies to achieve this purpose but is still under-explored. The most recent methods of this kind measure the uncertainty of each pre-divided region for manual labelling but they suffer from redundant information and require additional efforts for region division. This paper aims at addressing this is-sue by developing a hierarchical point-based active learn-ing strategy. Specifically, we measure the uncertainty for each point by a hierarchical minimum margin uncertainty module which considers the contextual information at mul-tiple levels. Then, a feature-distance suppression strategy is designed to select important and representative points for manual labelling. Besides, to better exploit the unlabelled data, we build a semi-supervised segmentation framework based on our active strategy. Extensive experiments on the
S3DIS and ScanNetV2 datasets demonstrate that the pro-posed framework achieves 96.5% and 100% performance of fully-supervised baseline with only 0.07% and 0.1% train-ing data, respectively, outperforming the state-of-the-art weakly-supervised and active learning methods. The code will be available at https://github.com/SmiletoE/HPAL. 1.

Introduction
Point cloud semantic segmentation aims to assign a cat-egory label for each 3D point, which can be applied to var-ious scenarios, such as robotics [34], autonomous driving
[1], and augmented reality [20]. Recently, deep learning
*Corresponding author. †Equal contribution. based methods [38, 52] have achieved impressive perfor-mance. These high-performing methods usually rely on large amounts of data with point-wise labels. However, ac-quiring such dense labels for 3D point clouds is extremely tedious and costly.
To relieve the labour and cost of annotation, many recent methods explore semi-supervised learning to learn 3D seg-mentation models with limited labelled points that are usu-ally sampled randomly. These methods attempt to employ effective strategies to propagate the label information to the unlabelled points [5, 17, 10, 13]. Although these semi-supervised methods can greatly decrease labelling costs, their performance might be limited due to various factors.
Among them, the most important reason is that some of the randomly selected points are in fact redundant while some really important points might be omitted.
As an alternative learning strategy, active learning re-cently is studied to alleviate such limitations for 3D seg-mentation. Lin et al. [24] divide the whole point clouds into segments and each segment is utilised as the basic query unit for sample selection. ReDAL [41] proposes to select those informative and diverse sub-scene regions for label acquisition. The entropy, colour discontinuity, and structural complexity are used to measure the information of sub-scene regions. Following it, SSDR-AL [29] groups the original point clouds into superpoints and incrementally selects the most informative regions for annotation. How-ever, these methods usually rely on pre-dividing the point cloud into multiple regions, and the region division strat-egy might negatively impact the performance. Moreover, as point clouds present strong semantic similarity in local ar-eas, selecting all the points in the local region results in a redundant labelling budget.
Motivated by the above analysis, this research aims at en-hancing the 3D segmentation performance with limited la-belled data in the active learning framework. Specifically, in comparison with previous region-based methods, we mea-sure the uncertainty or importance of labelling for each point to avoid the additional efforts and potential bias of re-gion division. However, considering each point individually may introduce extra noise to the training process, leading to unreliable uncertainty values that cannot reflect the real im-portance of each point. To alleviate this issue, we design a hierarchical minimum margin uncertainty (HMMU) mea-surement module by considering the local contextual infor-mation. The HMMU involves the uncertainty of the point and its neighbourhood. In this way, the acquired score can more effectively represent the importance of each point la-bel. Based on the uncertainty scores acquired by HMMU, we can directly choose the Top-K points for labelling.
However, as the point cloud presents semantic similarity in the local region, some redundant uncertain points tend to be distributed densely. To further reduce the labelling cost, we propose a feature-distance suppression module (FDS) to remove those uncertain points with similar features in the neighbourhood. By exploiting the devised HMMU mea-surement and FDS for redundant point filtering, our hierar-chical point-based active learning strategy is able to select more valuable points for labelling and thus reduce labelling costs. Furthermore, inspired by previous semi-supervised methods that exploit the unlabelled points, we utilise a sim-ple teacher-student scheme to enhance the supervision sig-nal by assigning a pseudo label for the unlabelled points.
The main contributions of this research are as follows:
• We propose a point-based active learning method for semi-supervised point cloud semantic segmenta-tion, which surpasses current semi-supervised or ac-tive learning methods and achieves comparable perfor-mance with full supervision methods relying on scarce annotations.
• We propose a novel hierarchical minimum margin un-certainty module to measure the uncertainty for each point by progressively perceiving the contextual infor-mation at increasing scales.
• We propose a feature-distance suppression module to remove redundant points with similar features in the neighbourhood and further minimise the labelling cost. 2.