Abstract 2D-to-3D human pose lifting is fundamental for 3D hu-man pose estimation (HPE), for which graph convolutional networks (GCNs) have proven inherently suitable for mod-eling the human skeletal topology. However, the current
GCN-based 3D HPE methods update the node features by aggregating their neighbors’ information without consid-ering the interaction of joints in different joint synergies.
Although some studies have proposed importing limb in-formation to learn the movement patterns, the latent syn-ergies among joints, such as maintaining balance are sel-dom investigated. We propose the Hop-wise GraphFormer with Intragroup Joint Refinement (HopFIR) architecture to tackle the 3D HPE problem. HopFIR mainly consists of a novel hop-wise GraphFormer (HGF) module and an in-tragroup joint refinement (IJR) module. The HGF module groups the joints by k-hop neighbors and applies a hop-wise transformer-like attention mechanism to these groups to discover latent joint synergies. The IJR module lever-ages the prior limb information for peripheral joint refine-ment. Extensive experimental results show that HopFIR outperforms the SOTA methods by a large margin, with a mean per-joint position error (MPJPE) on the Human3.6M dataset of 32.67 mm. We also demonstrate that the state-of-the-art GCN-based methods can benefit from the proposed hop-wise attention mechanism with a significant improve-ment in performance: SemGCN [42] and MGCN [49] are improved by 8.9% and 4.5%, respectively. 1.

Introduction
Monocular 3D human pose estimation aims to accurately regress the 3D locations of human joints in the camera co-ordinate system from a single image. It plays an important role in many applications, such as action recognition and human–computer interaction. Compared with the monocu-*Equal Contribution
†Corresponding Author
Figure 1. Comparison of performance and model size between the proposed HopFIR and SOTA methods, namely Modulated
GCN (MGCN) [49], SemGCN [42], Weight Unsharing [18], SR-Net [39], GraphSH [36], and GraFormer [43]. The methods are evaluated on the Human3.6M dataset [10] with ground truth 2D joints as input. The arrow shows the performance improvement obtained by inserting the HA layer into the other networks. Tiny, small, and normal denote the feature dimension of the HopFIR are 32, 64, and 128, respectively. lar systems, multi-view capture systems are expensive and inconvenient to set up and operate, which prevents them from being widely used in practice. To tackle the monocular 3D HPE task, some approaches [2, 15, 31, 32, 38] estimates 3D joint coordinates or heat maps directly from an image via a convolutional neural network (CNN) [13, 14]. How-ever, direct regression from the image space suffers from the problem of a large parameter searching space, which al-ways leads to a sub-optimal solution. Recently, Martinez et al. [20] constructed a simple fully connected network us-ing only 2D keypoints as input and achieved promising 3D
HPE performance, showing that the 3D human pose can be efficiently and accurately estimated from 2D joint po-sitions. Inspired by them and considering the thoroughly investigated 2D HPE, many works decompose the problem into two subtasks, i.e., the 2D HPE and 2D-to-3D pose lift-ing [18, 40, 49, 36]. 2D-to-3D pose lifting, therefore, has emerged as a fundamental task in this area that our work devotes to.
A key consideration in 2D-to-3D pose lifting is that the human skeleton topology is inherently sparse and graph-structured. Fully connected neural networks are less effec-tive in modeling graph-structured data due to their simple connections among all nodes and the probability of over-fitting. To leverage the information of the human skeletal topology, some works [36, 40, 49] have proposed to model the human body with GCNs and have achieved SOTA re-sults. For example, Ci et al. [4] introduced a locally con-nected network to enhance the representation capability of the GCN, and Liu et al. [18] explored the weight sharing and feature transformation that occurs before or after feature ag-gregation in the GCN. One limitation of these GCN-based 3D HPE methods, however, is that they update the node features by aggregating their neighbors’ information with-out considering the different contributions of these nodes to different joint synergies.
Instead of considering all the joints of a skeleton as a whole, Xue et al. [37] demonstrated that the human skele-ton exhibits obvious part-wise inconsistency in its motion patterns, as also reported in SRNet [39]. However, these works are limited to considering prior structural informa-tion of limb groupings and ignore investigating the latent groups underlying joint synergies. For example, the relative positions of the 1-hop neighbors of joint 0 are almost con-stant in “Discussion” subject, which can be a latent group, as shown in Fig. 2. Moreover, these works consider the joints in a limb as a whole to calculate the relationship with other limbs, which resulted in lower accuracy for peripheral joints, such as wrists and feet.
To address the abovementioned problems in monocular the Hop-wise 3D HPE, we propose a novel architecture:
GraphFormer with Intragroup Joint Refinement (HopFIR).
The first key component of HopFIR is a novel hop-wise
GraphFormer (HGF) module that considers k-hop neigh-In the HGF module, the information of every hop bors. of every joint is aggregated into the hidden space, such that
N × k groups of features are obtained for a skeleton model with N joints. Meanwhile, a hop-wise transformer-like at-tention mechanism is designed to extract the correlation among feature groups, which computes similarity by the dot product of the node feature and the group feature. The pro-posed HGF module enables the network to discover latent joint interactions considering human joint synergy. Because the HGF leverages little prior information about the human body and ignores the interaction among joints in a limb, es-pecially the interactions of peripheral joints associated with a limb, we introduce an intragroup joint refinement (IJR) module to strengthen the intragroup correlation of joints grouped by limb prior information. Specifically, a resid-ual block is built from two HGF modules followed by one
IJR module. The proposed HopFIR architecture achieves optimal regression accuracy with a stack of three blocks.
To summarize, our work makes the following contribu-tions:
• To the best of our knowledge, we design the first Hop-wise GraphFormer module to explore potential joint corre-lations underlying human joint synergy. We also prove that other GCN-based methods can benefit from the proposed
HGF module efficiently, as shown in Fig. 1.
• We design an Intragroup Joint Refinement module, which attends to intragroup joints to refine joint features through the associated limb, especially the wrists and feet.
The IJR module enables HGF modules to discover the latent synergies among joints.
• We propose the novel Hop-wise GraphFormer with
Intragroup Joint Refinement (HopFIR) architecture for 3D
HPE, which is built entirely from HGF and IJR modules.
Specifically, two HGF modules and one IJR module are coupled into a block.
• Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and generalizability of the proposed modules and HopFIR architecture by providing new state-of-the-art results on two challenging datasets, i.e., Human3.6M [10] and MPI-INF-3DHP [21]. 2.