Abstract
Chamfer distance (CD) is a standard metric to measure the shape dissimilarity between point clouds in point cloud completion, as well as a loss function for (deep) learning.
However, it is well known that CD is vulnerable to out-In liers, leading to the drift towards suboptimal models. contrast to the literature where most works address such issues in Euclidean space, we propose an extremely sim-ple yet powerful metric for point cloud completion, namely
Hyperbolic Chamfer Distance (HyperCD), that computes
CD in hyperbolic space.
In backpropagation, HyperCD consistently assigns higher weights to the matched point pairs with smaller Euclidean distances. In this way, good point matches are likely to be preserved while bad matches can be updated gradually, leading to better completion re-sults. We demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on the benchmark datasets, i.e. PCN, ShapeNet-55, and ShapeNet-34, and show from visualization that HyperCD can signif-icantly improve the surface smoothness. Code is available at: https://github.com/Zhang-VISLab. 1.

Introduction
Point clouds, one of the most important data representa-tions that can be easily acquired, play a key role in modern robotics and automation applications [54, 33, 44]. However, raw data of point clouds captured by existing 3D sensors is usually incomplete and sparse due to occlusion, limited sen-sor resolution and light reflection [68, 23, 31, 24, 75], which can negatively impact the performance of downstream tasks that require high-quality representation, such as point cloud segmentation and detection. In this paper, we address this issue by inferring the complete shape of an object or scene from incomplete raw point clouds. This task is referred to as point cloud completion [2].
*corresponding author (a) Euclidean (b) Hyperbolic
Figure 1. Illustration of point matching in the (a) Euclidean space and (b) hyperbolic space. With the position-aware embeddings in hyperbolic space, the mismatched point pairs in Euclidean space may be corrected, leading to better completion performance.
Point cloud completion is usually non-trivial due to the unordered and unstructured characteristics of point clouds (especially obtained from real-world environments). Re-cently, many (deep) learning-based approaches have been introduced to point cloud completion ranging from su-pervised learning, self-supervised learning to unsupervised learning [70, 55, 35, 6, 11, 43]. Amongst them, supervised learning with a general encoder-decoder structure serves as the dominant paradigm architectural choice for many re-searchers and achieves state-of-the-art on nearly all main-stream benchmarks. Their works largely focus on the de-sign of different structures in the encoder and decoder for more informative feature extractions and better point cloud generation [69, 62, 75, 54, 12], in Euclidean space.
Unequal Point Importance in Point Clouds. Humans of-ten perceive the visual quality of point clouds in a non-homogeneous way by putting a higher emphasis on the points with certain geometric structures such as planes, edges, corners, etc. For example, point clouds with smooth surfaces and sharp edges tend to be more visually appealing than their counterparts [64, 26]. Surprisingly, this simple yet nontrivial fact in point clouds, however, is hardly ex-plored in the literature of point cloud completion. For in-stance, Chamfer distance (CD) is a widely used metric in point cloud completion, e.g. [15, 61], to measure the shape dissimilarity between any pair of point clouds by calculat-ing the average distance between each point in one set to its nearest neighbor found in another. While CD can faith-fully reflect the global dissimilarity between the prediction and ground truth, the distances of all nearest-neighbor pairs between both sets are treated with equal importance (even higher weights to outliers). Thus, CD is sensitive to outliers.
Density-aware Chamfer Distance (DCD) in Euclidean
Space. To address such an equal weighting problem in
CD, recently Wu et al. [61] proposed a DCD metric by ex-ploring the disparity of density distributions in point clouds.
As illustrated in Fig. 1 (a), due to the different point den-sity in point clouds, denser points may easily have multiple matches, while sparser points may not. This phenomenon is considered in DCD as a weighting mechanism (inverse to the number of matches for balance) so that sparser points have higher weights. Meanwhile, DCD also proposed using an exponential approximation (the first order approximation of Taylor expansion) of CD to overcome the sensitivity to outliers, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
Though empirically DCD seems to work better than CD for point cloud completion, it may have some serious issues:
• Density-aware mechanism in DCD may assign higher weights to sparser points. This not only tends to obtain good matches at the edges and corners, but also favors the matches with outliers that leads to inferior completion.
• CD approximate functions hardly preserve good matches.
From Fig. 2, CD is sensitive to outliers because its gra-dient assigns higher (or equal) weights to the points with larger distances. DCD can mitigate this problem, but the weights either decrease too fast (exponentially) with the
ℓ1 distance or are small for good matches (even zeros for perfect matches) with the ℓ2 distance.
Hyperbolic Chamfer Distance (HyperCD). To mitigate these aforementioned problems in CD for point cloud com-pletion, in contrast to the literature, we believe that preserv-ing good matches while improving bad matches gradually during training is the key to the success in point cloud com-pletion. We call this matching property position-aware, as it only depends on the point positions. Recently hyper-bolic space has been demonstrated as a means to repre-sent the inherent compositional nature of point clouds us-ing position-aware embeddings within tree-like geometric structures, e.g. [36]. Such works highly motivate us to ex-plore CD in hyperbolic space.
As illustrated in Fig. 1 (b), hyperbolic space provides more flexibility than Euclidean distance as a measure be-tween points, and thus it may be possible to correct match-ing errors in CD. Besides, as illustrated in Fig. 2 (left), with different power functions, the hyperbolic spaces (defined by arcosh) can better approximate CD than DCD. Meanwhile, as we see, the curves of gradients of y = arcosh(1 + x) and y = arcosh(1 + x3/3) are quite similar to those for
DCD, while the gradient of y = arcosh(1 + x2/2) pro-duces a nice curve that exactly follows what we expect for a good weighting mechanism in point cloud completion. This observation provides us new insights on defining HyperCD.
Specifically, by matching the points with nearest neigh-bors in Euclidean space (represented by x-axis in Fig. 2), we first obtain the matches between the prediction and ground truth, and vice versa. We then plug these Euclidean distances into arcosh to represent them in hyperbolic space.
Empirically we demonstrate that models trained with such a simple metric can significantly outperform the counterparts trained with CD as well as DCD.
Contributions. We list our main contributions as follows:
• We propose an extremely simple yet powerful distance metric, HyperCD, for point cloud completion. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to explore hyperbolic space for point cloud completion.
• We demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on several benchmark datasets based on popular networks that are trained with HyperCD. 2.