Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) have gained consider-able attention for their high-quality results in 3D scene re-construction and rendering. Recently, there have been ac-tive studies on various tasks such as novel view synthesis and scene editing. However, editing NeRFs is challenging as accurately decomposing the desired area of 3D space and ensuring the consistency of edited results from differ-ent angles is difﬁcult. In this paper, we propose ICE-NeRF, an Interactive Color Editing framework that performs color editing by taking a pre-trained NeRF and a rough user mask as input. Our proposed method performs the entire color editing process in only under a minute using a partial ﬁne-tuning approach. To perform effective color editing, we ad-dress two issues: (1) the entanglement of the implicit repre-sentation that causes unwanted color changes in undesired areas when learning weights, and (2) the loss of multi-view consistency when ﬁne-tuning for a single or a few views.
To address these issues, we introduce two techniques: Acti-vation Field-based Regularization (AFR) and Single-mask
Multi-view Rendering (SMR). The AFR performs weight regularization during ﬁne-tuning based on the assumption that not all weights have an equal impact on the desired area. The SMR maps the 2D mask to 3D space through inverse projection and renders it from other views to gen-erate multi-view masks. ICE-NeRF not only enables well-decomposed, multi-view consistent color editing but also signiﬁcantly reduces processing time compared to existing methods. 1.

Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [16] is a 3D reconstruc-tion method that utilizes multiple 2D images taken from var-ious angles to generate photorealistic reconstructions. Due to its high-quality results, NeRF has gained considerable attention in various ﬁelds [31, 1, 28, 15]. With the grow-Figure 1. Concept overview and color editing results: We compare our method with the state-of-the-art NeRF color editing methods,
PaletteNeRF [14] and RecolorNeRF [10]. While PaletteNeRF and
RecolorNeRF effectively change the colors of the target object, they also inadvertently cause unwanted color alterations in areas that should remain unchanged. ing interest in NeRFs, there is an increasing demand for techniques that can modify the contents of the 3D scenes learned by NeRFs [14, 10, 27, 29]. Similar to how images and videos are edited to suit user preferences, NeRFs are
also being developed to enable scene editing according to user tastes. However, editing NeRFs is challenging because it involves accurately decomposing the desired parts of the 3D space and ensuring that they are modiﬁed consistently across various views.
Various methods have been proposed to support NeRF appearance editing. One approach recovers physical scene properties, such as albedo and specular roughness, to en-able rendering under novel lighting conditions or material property adjustments [4, 37]. Another approach learns la-tent codes together with the NeRF reconstruction to control its appearance, including changes in illumination or color
[22, 32]. Recently, the state-of-the-art NeRF recoloring method, called PaletteNeRF [14] and RecolorNeRF [10], were introduced. With a novel framework and regulariza-tion techniques, both methods achieved high-quality, multi-view consistent recolored results for general 3D scenes.
However, these methods are palette-based, meaning they represent the scene by extracting a few basic colors and combining them through weighted summation. A limitation of these approaches is that they cannot selectively recolor a speciﬁc object when multiple objects with similar colors are present in the scene. In this case, the colors of undesired ob-jects change simultaneously (please see Fig. 1).
In this paper, we propose ICE-NeRF, a method that al-lows the user to interactively and intuitively edit NeRF scenes. Our approach is simple and efﬁcient: We use a pre-trained model and take the user’s rough mask for a sin-gle view as input. We then ﬁne-tune some of the model’s weights to achieve the desired color in the user mask region.
Since only some of the model’s weights are ﬁne-tuned, without requiring additional weights, the recolored model is obtained in less than a minute. This makes our method both time and memory efﬁcient. Additionally, our method is ﬂexible and can be applied to various model structures.
This versatility makes our approach a practical solution for
NeRF recoloring across various model structures.
Our proposed method, while simple in concept, requires careful consideration of a couple of issues to ensure its prac-ticality. One issue is the entanglement of the implicit repre-sentation, where the color of a particular part is embedded across the entire weight of the model. A simple ﬁne-tuning approach without consideration of this will result in changes in areas where color changes are not desired, leading to poor decomposition performance. A second issue is that radiance in most NeRFs depends on view direction, which can lead to poor multi-view consistency when training with user masks for a small number of views. Ignoring this issue will lead to the sudden and unexpected changes in the color of the target area when the viewpoint is altered during the process of novel view synthesis.
To address these issues, we propose two novel tech-niques: Activation Field-based Regularization (AFR) and
Single-mask Multi-view Rendering (SMR) techniques. To address the entanglement issue caused by the implicit rep-resentation’s nature, we propose the AFR. We assume that speciﬁc weights in the model contain more color informa-tion for particular regions of the scene. Based on this as-sumption, we perform weight regularization, through which the model can minimize learning weights that cause color changes in undesired areas and focus on learning weights that have a greater impact on color changes in the desired ar-eas. The SMR technique performs an inverse projection of the user’s 2D mask onto the object in 3D space and renders it from multiple views, achieving a similar effect to having a multi-view mask. As a result, our approach achieves well-decomposed and multi-view consistent results, even when the user provides only a rough mask for a single view or a small number of views. Our contributions are as follows:
• We propose the ICE-NeRF framework, which allows users to selectively recolor desired regions with inter-active control while avoiding color changes in unde-sired areas.
• Our approach is not only efﬁcient as it only ﬁne-tunes some of the weights of a pre-trained model, but also enjoys a high speed of only one minute to complete the entire process.
• Through the proposed AFR and SMR techniques, our method achieves strong decomposition performance and ensures solid multi-view consistency. 2.