Abstract 1.

Introduction
We explore the problem of Incremental Generalized Cat-egory Discovery (IGCD). This is a challenging category-incremental learning setting where the goal is to develop models that can correctly categorize images from previ-ously seen categories, in addition to discovering novel ones.
Learning is performed over a series of time steps where the model obtains new labeled and unlabeled data, and dis-cards old data, at each iteration. The difficulty of the prob-lem is compounded in our generalized setting as the un-labeled data can contain images from categories that may or may not have been observed before. We present a new method for IGCD which combines non-parametric catego-rization with efficient image sampling to mitigate catas-trophic forgetting. To quantify performance, we propose a new benchmark dataset named iNatIGCD that is motivated by a real-world fine-grained visual categorization task. In our experiments we outperform existing related methods.
The wealth and complexity of visual information poten-tially observable by artificial systems deployed in the real world vastly exceeds the comparative simplicity of our care-fully curated benchmark vision datasets. To operate safely and reliably in challenging environments, these systems need to be able to correctly recognize previously learned concepts, not confuse these known concepts with novel ones, and be able to differentiate novel concepts so that they can be grouped and efficiently learned. As humans, we excel at this type of flexible learning in such dynamic settings [1, 34], and it is clear that we need to endow our artificial systems with similar desirable abilities.
In the context of visual categorization, there is a rich body of work that has moved beyond the traditional su-pervised setting into more open-ended learning paradigms.
For example, in semi-supervised learning, in addition to la-beled data, during training we also have access to unlabeled
method that combines a non-parametric classifier with a density-based sampling mechanism that efficiently enables the selection of informative examples for both classification and past memorization.
Benchmarking in the incremental discovery setting to date has largely been restricted to artificial category-based splits of conventional image categorization datasets [32, 59, 31, 39]. To encourage future progress on IGCD, we also present a new dataset called iNatIGCD. iNatIGCD more faithfully simulates a real-world fine-grained incremental learning setting. It is motivated by a real-world visual cate-gorization use-case whereby the categories present at differ-ent stages are selected using spatio-temporal metadata from the community science platform iNaturalist [26]. As a re-sult, iNatIGCD naturally includes challenges such as ap-pearance shifts, in addition to both fine and coarse-grained differences between old and novel categories present in im-ages sourced from different geographical regions.
In summary, we present the following contributions: (i) A new approach for
IGCD that combines non-parametric classification with efficient incremental learning (ii) iNatIGCD, a via density-based support set selection. new in-the-wild dataset for benchmarking IGCD that fea-tures a multi-stage training split motivated by a real-world fine-grained visual categorization use-case. (iii) A thorough evaluation on IGCD where we outperform recent methods. 2.