Abstract
Motion forecasting is an important component in au-tonomous driving systems. One of the most challenging problems in motion forecasting is interactive trajectory pre-diction, whose goal is to jointly forecasts the future trajec-tories of interacting agents. To this end, we present a large-scale interactive trajectory prediction dataset named INT2 for INTeractive trajectory prediction at INTersections.
INT2 includes 612,000 scenes, each lasting 1 minute, con-taining up to 10,200 hours of data. The agent trajectories
∗ Work done while at AIR, THU.
† Corresponding author.
Sponsored by Baidu Inc. through Apollo-AIR Joint Research Center. are auto-labeled by a high-performance offline temporal de-tection and fusion algorithm, whose quality is further in-spected by human judges. Vectorized semantic maps and traffic light information are also included in INT2. Addi-tionally, the dataset poses an interesting domain mismatch challenge. For each intersection, we treat rush-hour and non-rush-hour segments as different domains. We bench-mark the best open-sourced interactive trajectory predic-tion method on INT2 and Waymo Open Motion, under in-domain and cross-domain settings. The dataset, code and models are publicly available at https://github.com/AIR-DISCOVER/INT2.
1.

Introduction
Autonomous driving is one of the most developed appli-cation fields of computer vision, with many heavily stud-ied sub-tasks like 3D detection [36, 37, 50], segmentation
[44, 47] and localization [2, 34]. More recently, the re-search community has directed its focus towards the bur-geoning problem of motion forecasting, which seeks to aug-ment down-stream decision making mechanisms by provid-ing enhanced insights into the future trajectories of objects.
Motion forecasting is indeed an old problem in the com-puter vision community. Conventional datasets focus on forecasting pedestrian trajectory in campus [23, 32, 43].
Whilst methods developed on these legacy datasets can po-tentially be applied to autonomous driving scenarios, they treat each agent separately or say they are not interactive. If we forecast the future trajectories of two interacting agents separately, they may crash into each other, which makes lit-tle sense for down-stream decision making modules.
To this end, interactive trajectory prediction is recently formalized by the Waymo Open Motion dataset [7] which benchmarks the trajectory prediction accuracy of interact-ing agents in diverse scenarios. In this paper, we contribute another large-scale interactive trajectory prediction dataset to the community, with a focus on intersections. Our dataset is named as INT2, which is short for INTeractive trajectory prediction at INTersections. INT2 has the following fea-tures: (1) High quality. INT2 is captured at 16 different in-tersections by a multi-sensor system and an offline detec-tion and tracking algorithm stack. The multi-sensor system consists of several RGB cameras and LiDARs mounted on poles. Sensors are calibrated routinely. The offline algo-rithm stack applies state-of-the-art 3D detection and track-ing algorithms on raw data without the concern of latency, and fuses the results with production-level rules. (2) Large scale.
INT2 contains about 612,000 scenes with each 1 minute long, counting up to 10,200 hours. By contrast, Waymo Open Motion has about 100,000 scenes with every 20 seconds long, counting up to 570 hours. Apart from the total scale, traffic in each 1-minute segment can cover one complete traffic light cycle. (3) Rich information. INT2 has rich information in sev-eral terms. INT2 provides vectorized road maps at all 16 intersections, which is a common input to state-of-the-art trajectory prediction algorithms. INT2 provides 3D agent boxes for small and large vehicles, pedestrians and cyclists.
INT provides temporal traffic light information and links to the lanes they have control over.
Besides the aforementioned three standard merits, INT2 is suitable for the study of domain mismatch problem thanks to the fact that it is captured at intersections.
Firstly, domain mismatch is as important for interactive trajectory prediction as for other sensing problems. Since trajectory prediction models are usually used in an itera-tive manner in practice, minor errors caused by domain mis-match would explode over several rounds. For example, if we predict the future trajectory for 8 seconds and then use the predicted trajectory for another 8 seconds, errors caused by domain mismatch would get larger.
Secondly, it is difficult to properly define domains for the trajectory prediction problem. We ask readers to think about this problem: given two different traffic scenarios, how could we tell whether they are sampled from the same domain or not? Since state-of-the-art trajectory predic-tion methods all exploit vectorized maps as input, the ever-changing map information in existing datasets makes the definition of domains challenging. In our INT2 dataset, by contrast, the definition of domains becomes natural as tra-jectories are captured at fixed intersections so that we can use rush-hour and non-rush-hour data as two clearly differ-ent domains (Fig. 1), while bypassing the impact of maps.
For initial benchmarking, we provide in-domain and cross-domain interactive trajectory prediction results using the state-of-the-art method M2I [39], pointing to interesting and practical challenges. Baseline training framework and pre-trained models will be released along with the dataset. 2.