Abstract capable of producing realistic, vivid, and remarkably long-term 3D HOI predictions.
This paper addresses a novel task of anticipating 3D human-object interactions (HOIs). Most existing research on HOI synthesis lacks comprehensive whole-body interac-tions with dynamic objects, e.g., often limited to manipulat-ing small or static objects. Our task is significantly more challenging, as it requires modeling dynamic objects with various shapes, capturing whole-body motion, and ensur-ing physically valid interactions. To this end, we propose
InterDiff, a framework comprising two key steps: (i) inter-action diffusion, where we leverage a diffusion model to en-code the distribution of future human-object interactions; (ii) interaction correction, where we introduce a physics-informed predictor to correct denoised HOIs in a diffusion step. Our key insight is to inject prior knowledge that the interactions under reference with respect to contact points follow a simple pattern and are easily predictable. Ex-periments on multiple human-object interaction datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method for this task,
*Equal contribution. 1.

Introduction
Being able to “look into the future” is a remarkable cog-nitive hallmark of humans. Not only can we anticipate how people will move or behave in the near future, but we can also forecast how our actions will interact with the ever-changing environment based on past information. An au-tomated system that accurately forecasts 3D human-object interactions (HOIs) would have significant implications for various fields, such as robotics, animation, and computer vi-sion. However, existing work on HOI synthesis does not ad-equately reflect the real-world complexity, e.g., examining hand-object interactions from an ego-centric view [51, 53], synthesizing interactions of grasping small objects [20], representing HOIs in simplified skeletons [13, 71, 88], or overlooking object dynamics [46, 81, 97].
To overcome such limitations, in this work, we reformu-late the task of human-object interaction prediction, where
Rather than relying on post-optimization or physics sim-ulation, we introduce a pure learning-based method that uti-lizes a diffusion model with intuitive physics directly in-jected, which we call “InterDiff.” Our approach is based on the key observation that the short-term relative motion of an object with respect to the contact point follows a simple and nearly deterministic pattern, despite the complexity of the overall interaction. For example, when juggling balls, their path reflects a complex pattern under the global co-ordinate system, due to the movement of the juggler. Yet, each ball simply moves up and down with respect to the juggler’s hand. We provide further illustrations of relative motion extracted from the BEHAVE dataset [5] in Figure 2.
Inspired by this, our InterDiff incorporates two com-ponents as follows. (i) Interaction Diffusion: a Denois-ing Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM)-based genera-tor [29] that models the distribution of future human-object interactions. (ii) Interaction Correction: a novel physics-informed interaction predictor that synthesizes the object’s relative motion with respect to regions in contact on the hu-man body. We enhance this predictor by promoting sim-ple motion patterns for objects and encouraging contact fit-ting of surfaces, which largely mitigates the artifacts of in-teractions produced by the diffusion model. By injecting the plausible dynamics back into the diffusion model iter-atively, InterDiff generates vivid human motion sequences with realistic interactions for various 3D dynamic objects.
Another attractive property of InterDiff is that its two com-ponents can be trained separately, while naturally conform-ing during inference without fine-tuning.
Our contributions are three-fold. (i) To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to tackle the task of mesh-based 3D HOI prediction. (ii) We propose the first diffusion framework that leverages past motion and shape informa-tion to generate future human-object interactions. (iii) We introduce a simple yet effective HOI corrector that incor-porates physics priors and thus produces plausible interac-tions to infill the denoising generation. Extensive experi-ments validate the effectiveness of our framework, particu-larly for out-of-distribution objects, and long-term autore-gressive inference where input past HOIs may be unseen in the training data. We attribute our improved generalizabil-ity to our important design strategies, such as the promo-tion of simple motion patterns and the anticipated interac-tion within a local reference system. 2.