Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) aims to leverage mas-sive unlabeled data when labels are expensive to obtain.
Unfortunately, in many real-world applications, the col-lected unlabeled data will inevitably contain unseen-class outliers not belonging to any of the labeled classes. To deal with the challenging open-set SSL task, the mainstream methods tend to first detect outliers and then filter them out. However, we observe a surprising fact that such ap-proach could result in more severe performance degrada-tion when labels are extremely scarce, as the unreliable outlier detector may wrongly exclude a considerable por-tion of valuable inliers. To tackle with this issue, we in-troduce a novel open-set SSL framework, IOMatch, which can jointly utilize inliers and outliers, even when it is dif-ficult to distinguish exactly between them. Specifically, we propose to employ a multi-binary classifier in combination with the standard closed-set classifier for producing uni-fied open-set classification targets, which regard all out-liers as a single new class. By adopting these targets as open-set pseudo-labels, we optimize an open-set classifier with all unlabeled samples including both inliers and out-liers. Extensive experiments have shown that IOMatch sig-nificantly outperforms the baseline methods across differ-ent benchmark datasets and different settings despite its re-markable simplicity. Our code and models are available at https://github.com/nukezil/IOMatch. 1.

Introduction
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) [5] is a classical ma-chine learning paradigm that attempts to improve a model’s performance by utilizing unlabeled data in addition to in-sufficient labeled data. With a tiny fraction of labeled data,
*Corresponding author: Yinghuan Shi (syh@nju.edu.cn). Zekun Li,
Yinghuan Shi and Yang Gao are with the State Key Laboratory for Novel
Software Technology and National Institute of Healthcare Data Science,
Nanjing University. Lei Qi is with the School of Computer Science and En-gineering, Southeast University. This work is supported by NSFC Program (62222604, 62206052, 62192783), China Postdoctoral Science Founda-tion Project (2023T160100), Jiangsu Natural Science Foundation Project (BK20210224), and CCF-Lenovo Bule Ocean Research Fund.
Figure 1. The motivation of our work comes from a surprising fact in open-set semi-supervised learning tasks: An unreliable outlier detector can be more harmful than outliers themselves, because it will wrongly exclude valuable inliers from subsequent training.
For this issue, we consider a unified paradigm for utilizing open-set unlabeled data, even when it is difficult to distinguish exactly between inliers and outliers, and thus we propose IOMatch. advanced deep SSL methods can achieve the performance of fully supervised methods in some cases, such as image classification [21] and semantic segmentation [26].
Most existing SSL methods rely on the fundamental as-sumption that labeled and unlabeled data share the same class space. However, it is usually difficult, even impossi-ble, to collect such a unlabeled data set in many real-world applications since we can not manually examine the mas-sive unlabeled data. Therefore, a more challenging scenario arises, where unseen-class outliers not belonging to any of the labeled classes exist in the unlabeled data. Such setting is called Open-Set Semi-Supervised Learning (OSSL) [28].
The negative effects of unseen-class outliers have been observed in a pioneer work [17]. As the research of SSL has grown rapidly in recent years, we extensively evaluate more advanced SSL methods. Some of the key results are shown in Figure 1, in which we plot the performance un-der standard and open-set SSL as the dash lines and charts, respectively. Taking the classical method, FixMatch [21], as an example, we can observe that adding extra outliers does hurt the classification accuracy compared to the stan-dard SSL setting with no outlier, because it is impossible to obtain correct seen-class pseudo-labels for these outliers.
An intuitive approach to handle outliers is to detect and re-move them, as OpenMatch [18] does. In particular, it com-bines FixMatch with an outlier detector. The detector is first pre-trained and then used to retain only inliers for Fix-Figure 3. We define the utilization rate of open-set unlabeled data as the ratio of selected correct pseudo-labels to all unlabeled sam-ples. Compared to the previous methods, IOMatch can not only retain more valuable inliers but also utilize additional outliers by adopting open-set targets as pseudo-labels. liers and outliers via pseudo-labeling. We illustrate the core idea in Figure 2. Different from the detect-and-filter meth-ods [10,12,18,28], all the network modules of IOMatch are simultaneously optimized, which makes it easy to use.
We conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate the ef-fectiveness of IOMatch across different benchmark datasets and different settings. The performance gains are significant especially when labels are scarce and class mismatch is se-vere. For instance, on the CIFAR-100 dataset, IOMatch out-performs the current state-of-the-art by 7.46% and 4.78%, when the proportion of outliers is as high as 80% and 50%, and only 4 labels per seen class are available. Figure 3 explains why IOMatch is able to achieve such improve-ments: Compared to the existing OSSL methods, IOMatch avoids incorrect exclusion of valuable inliers; Compared to the standard SSL methods, IOMatch can additionally utilize
“poisonous” outliers. In a nutshell, with the novel paradigm of joint inliers and outliers utilization, open-set unlabeled data can be more fully exploited by IOMatch.
We summarize our contributions as follows:
• We reveal that existing open-set SSL methods could easily fail due to their unreliable outlier detectors when labels are extremely scarce.
• We propose a novel open-set SSL framework called
IOMatch that can jointly utilize both inliers and out-liers in a unified paradigm.
• We perform comprehensive experiments across vari-ous OSSL settings. In spite of its simplicity, IOMatch significantly outperforms the strong rivals, especially when the tasks are challenging. 2.