Abstract
With the emergence of powerful deep learning tools, more and more effective deep denoisers have advanced the field of image denoising. However, the huge progress made by these learning-based methods severely relies on large-scale and high-quality noisy/clean training pairs, which limits the practicality in real-world scenarios. To overcome this, researchers have been exploring self-supervised ap-proaches that can denoise without paired data. However, the unavailable noise prior and inefficient feature extrac-tion take these methods away from high practicality and precision.
In this paper, we propose a Denoise-Corrupt-Denoise pipeline (DCD-Net) for self-supervised image de-noising. Specifically, we design an iterative training strat-egy, which iteratively optimizes the denoiser and noise es-timator, and gradually approaches high denoising perfor-mances using only single noisy images without any noise prior. The proposed self-supervised image denoising frame-work provides very competitive results compared with state-of-the-art methods on widely used synthetic and real-world image denoising benchmarks. 1.

Introduction
Image denoising is a significant research problem in the field of image processing, which aims to remove noise while preserving the details and structures of the original image.
Image denoising benefits not only visual quality perceived by the human eye but also downstream imaging problems, including remote sensing [23, 39], medical imag-ing [24], microscopy [22], and low-light imaging [6,40,44].
Numerous studies have been proposed for image denois-ing. Traditionally, researchers utilize hand-crafted priors to remove noise. Among them, wavelet [35], total varia-tion [33], and self-similarity [3,7] based methods are widely used. More recently, with the rapid development of com-putational resources, deep learning, specially convolutional neural network (CNN) based methods [12, 32, 34, 47, 48] have gained increasing attention due to their strong rep-resentation and spatial feature extraction ability. Since
*Corresponding Author: fuying@bit.edu.cn
Noisy (36.63/0.91)
N2N (44.74/0.99)
N2V (43.04/0.99)
Ours (45.52/0.99)
Figure 1: Performance overview of our self-supervised denoising method from a single noisy image.
Our performance surpasses baseline self-supervised method
N2V [18], and has competitive results with a strong base-line N2N [21], which is trained on paired noisy observa-tions. The PSNR/SSIM results are shown in the brackets.
DnCNN [47], which is the earliest exploration of deep de-noiser, a large number of related works emerged within a few years [12, 32, 34, 48]. Although CNN-based denois-ers achieve very promising results compared to traditional methods, the severe dependence on high-quality noisy/clean training pairs limits their application in real scenes.
To address the challenge of collecting paired real data, there are two common technical approaches. The first ap-proach involves synthetic noisy/clean image pairs instead of real ones. To achieve this, modeling noise distribu-tion becomes crucial to reduce the domain gap between the synthetic training data and real evaluation data. Early methods model noise distribution using simple statistical models [9, 25, 46]. In recent years, more accurate genera-tive models [1, 5, 15, 43] and sophisticated statistical mod-els [40, 49, 50] are proposed, which can better describe real
sensor noise distribution. Precise noise modeling is verified to be a good alternative for paired real data [40], but such methods still need camera-specific training/calibration data, which limits its application.
The other approach is to design unsupervised and self-supervised training strategies. These methods relieve the network from noisy/clean training pairs. Instead, their de-noising model can be trained by unpaired [4] or weakly paired images. For example, Noise2Noise (N2N) [21] needs a clean image’s two noisy observations for network learning. To further improve the practicality, in recent years, more methods [16, 18, 20, 30, 37, 38] intend to re-cover clean images from single noisy images. Among these methods, some of them [16, 29, 30, 42] generate noisy/noisy pairs from a single noisy image, which free the learning of
Noise2Noise from two noisy observations, but a prerequi-site for these methods is knowing the noise models in ad-vance. Others [18, 20, 38] propose customized blind-spot networks that are designed to avoid identity mapping, which discard important pixel information.
In this work, we propose a novel Denoise-Corrupt-Denoise training pipeline (DCD-Net) for self-supervised image denoising. By carefully analyzing the mainstream self-supervised denoising methods, we devise a solution that can simultaneously make up for the deficiencies of both the impractical and less accurate problems of existing self-supervised methods. Specifically, we present an iterative deep denoising pipeline that takes only single noisy images to approach the performance with additional training infor-mation (e.g., paired noisy observations for N2N [21]). We repeatedly follow the pipeline of denoising for clean predic-tion, estimating noise level, corrupting for N2N pairs, and performing N2N learning. Then, by iteratively training the denoiser and noise estimation model, the denoising perfor-mance gradually reaches a strong baseline, i.e., N2N, even though we have only single noisy observations. The pro-posed DCD-Net achieves promising results on widely used synthetic and real-world image denoising benchmarks.
The main contributions can be summarized as follows: 1. We carefully analyze the pros and cons of exist-ing denoising methods and propose a novel Denoise-Corrupt-Denoise learning pipeline for self-supervised image denoising. 2. We propose to iteratively train the denoiser with a noise estimation model, which makes the denoising network gradually approach a strong weakly super-vised baseline, i.e., N2N. 3. We apply our denoising framework on both synthetic and real image denoising benchmarks, and the results verify our superiority over leading self-supervised methods. 2.