Abstract
Humans are good at recomposing novel objects, i.e. they can identify commonalities between unknown objects from general structure to finer detail, an ability difficult to repli-cate by machines. We propose a framework, ISCO, to re-compose an object using 3D superquadrics as semantic parts directly from 2D views without training a model that uses 3D supervision. To achieve this, we optimize the su-perquadric parameters that compose a specific instance of the object, comparing its rendered 3D view and 2D im-age silhouette. Our ISCO framework iteratively adds new superquadrics wherever the reconstruction error is high, abstracting first coarse regions and then finer details of the target object. With this simple coarse-to-fine induc-tive bias, ISCO provides consistent superquadrics for re-lated object parts, despite not having any semantic super-vision. Since ISCO does not train any neural network, it is also inherently robust to out-of-distribution objects. Ex-periments show that, compared to recent single instance superquadrics reconstruction approaches, ISCO provides consistently more accurate 3D reconstructions, even from images in the wild. Code available at https://github. com/ExplainableML/ISCO. 1.

Introduction
Although the Jeff Koons sculpture “Balloon Dog” does not have a nose or teeth of a dog, we are able to recognize the dog when we look at the sculpture as a whole. This is because we can decompose the sculpture into semantically meaningful parts and recompose them in our minds to give it the name of a familiar object. Equipping machines with the same perceptual grouping capabilities would improve how they process and interact with the environment [46].
In this context, decomposing 3D objects by means of simple 3D shapes [45, 10] abstract away complex details of the object, providing a parsimonious representation use-ful in many applications, such as robotics [62] and virtual reality [35]. Recent works addressed this task by training a a neural network on a collection of 3D shapes, showing that semantically consistent part decompositions emerge, i.e. networks predict the same semantic parts (e.g. back,
Figure 1: ISCO recomposes 3D objects from real-world im-ages using superquadrics. It acts on 2D silhouettes and not 3D models learned via a neural network, placing new su-perquadrics iteratively into the scene. The final 3D abstrac-tion and simple parts can then be used for mixed reality. legs) across shapes (e.g. chairs, sofa) [60, 44, 43]. How-ever, the data collection is costly in the real world, where the need for simple compositional representations is more evi-dent. At the same time, instance-based approaches [29, 66] sidestep such need, but they require 3D inputs (e.g. point clouds) and do not extract semantically relatable parts.
In this work we take a different perspective, proposing It-erative Superquadric reComposition of Objects (ISCO), an instance-level self-supervised algorithm that, given multi-ple 2D views of an object, recomposes its 3D shape using superquadrics [45, 44], without access to 3D data. ISCO compares real and synthesized 2D views via a differentiable rendering pipeline [33], directly optimizing the primitive parameters. To extract more precise abstractions, we per-form an iterative recomposition of the object i) initializing primitives in regions with high reconstruction error; ii) fit-ting them by prioritizing local accuracy over global cover-age, representing finer details as the number of primitives increases. Results on ShapeNet [5] and ShapeNet-Part [74] show that ISCO achieves accurately reconstructs 3D shapes, identifying semantic parts much better than recent instance-To summarize, our contributions are: based approaches[29, 66]. Acting at instance-level and on multiple views, ISCO can readily work on arbitrary objects and real-world images, as we show on Common Objects in 3D [51]. Fig. 1 shows a simplified version of our pipeline. i) we tackle the problem of 3D shape abstraction from multiple views, ii) we propose ISCO, a self-supervised algorithm that itera-tively fits superquadrics to unexplained input regions, di-rectly optimizing their parameters via a differentiable ren-dering pipeline; iii) we show that ISCO precisely recon-structs input shapes, is easily transferable to real-world ap-plications and can better relate shape parts across different instances than previous instance-based approaches. 2.