Abstract 1.

Introduction
Existing vector font generation approaches either strug-gle to preserve high-frequency corner details of the glyph or produce vector shapes that have redundant segments, which hinders their applications in practical scenarios. In this pa-per, we propose to learn vector fonts from pixelated font im-ages utilizing a joint neural representation that consists of a signed distance field (SDF) and a probabilistic corner field (CF) to capture shape corner details. To achieve smooth shape interpolation on the learned shape manifold, we es-tablish connections between the two fields for better align-ment. We further design a vectorization process to extract high-quality and compact vector fonts from our joint neural representation. Experiments demonstrate that our method can generate more visually appealing vector fonts with a higher level of compactness compared to existing alterna-tives.
The automatic generation of stylized fonts has important applications in art and design. The vector font is preferred to the pixelated font image by virtue of its scalability in rendering and compactness in storage and therefore has be-come mainstream.
Existing vector font generation methods either directly work on the vector format [3, 25, 34], or perform vector-ization on the generated pixelated font image [26]. The former mainly represents a glyph shape as a sequence of
Scalable Vector Graphic (SVG) drawing commands and learns to generate such sequences by ground truth vector supervision or utilizing a differentiable vector shape ren-derer [15]. Despite the ability of this representation for capturing fine shape details, these methods suffer from the ambiguity brought by the nature of the many-to-one map-ping from the drawing commands to the rendered shape, in which case different drawing commands could produce the same-looking shape. This ambiguity often leads to redun-dant segments in the generated sequence, degrading shape quality. The latter stream benefits from coordinate-based neural implicit fields that emerged in recent years [4, 21], and tends to produce higher-quality overall shape. How-ever, the inherent smoothness of the network output with respect to the input coordinates hinders these methods from accurately modeling high-frequency geometric details like the corners.
Based on the above observations, in this paper, we aim to present an implicit neural representation of fonts that can both model geometric details and be used to synthe-size high-quality vector fonts. Our intuition is to enhance existing implicit neural representations with explicit mod-eling of corner positions and design a procedure to convert this representation to vector primitives. More specifically, we model the overall glyph shape using a 2D signed dis-tance field (SDF), and model a probabilistic corner field (CF) to indicate the probability of each position being a corner point. We learn a latent space of the proposed repre-sentation on a large number of fonts using their pixelated images and ground truth corner positions as supervision.
To achieve smoothness interpolation in the latent space, we build correspondences of the two fields by a novel signed distance flow loss. Converting this joint implicit neural rep-resentation to vector fonts is not trivial, as we need to in-tegrate the corners into the base shapes without bringing artifacts. To achieve this, we take inspiration from the dual contouring algorithm [13] to locate the coordinates of cor-ners from CF, and obtain a compact vector shape via incre-mental curve fitting. We compare our method with existing vector font/shape synthesis methods and demonstrate that our proposed representation can achieve higher quality in the font reconstruction and interpolation task, while being able to generate compact vector output.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:
• A joint neural implicit representation for fonts that combines a signed distance field (SDF) and a proba-bilistic corner field (CF) to capture corner details of glyph shapes better.
• A customized vectorization process to convert the joint representation to compact vector fonts.
• State-of-the-art quality on font reconstruction and in-terpolation task both qualitatively and quantitatively. 2.