Abstract
The progress in maritime obstacle detection is hindered by the lack of a diverse dataset that adequately captures the complexity of general maritime environments. We present the first maritime panoptic obstacle detection benchmark
LaRS, featuring scenes from Lakes, Rivers and Seas. Our major contribution is the new dataset, which boasts the largest diversity in recording locations, scene types, obsta-cle classes, and acquisition conditions among the related datasets. LaRS is composed of over 4000 per-pixel labeled key frames with nine preceding frames to allow utilization of the temporal texture, amounting to over 40k frames. Each key frame is annotated with 8 thing, 3 stuff classes and 19 global scene attributes. We report the results of 27 se-mantic and panoptic segmentation methods, along with sev-eral performance insights and future research directions.
To enable objective evaluation, we have implemented an online evaluation server. The LaRS dataset, evaluation toolkit and benchmark are publicly available at: https:
//lojzezust.github.io/lars-dataset 1.

Introduction
The maritime industry is undergoing a fundamental transformation. With over 90% of goods being moved over water, substantial efforts are being invested in development of autonomous unmanned surface vessels (USV) [19, 15].
These autonomous boats serve a wide range of purposes, ranging from automated inspection, environmental moni-toring, waste cleanup, cargo shipping, to civilian transporta-tion. The autonomy of USVs critically depends on obstacle detection capability for timely collision avoidance. Simi-larly to the automotive domain [18, 21], cameras have been extensively explored for this task [26, 7, 36, 3, 35, 2].
There are several challenges associated with maritime obstacle detection. The appearance of the navigable sur-face (water) is dynamic and reflects the environment, often containing strong mirroring and sun glitter (Figure 1). Al-though modern detectors [45, 46, 8] can accurately detect common dynamic obstacles such as ships and boats, the ap-pearance of obstacles such as buoys, people and animals can vary significantly, bringing the task closer to anomaly detection [30, 9]. Furthermore, background static obstacles, such as shorelines and piers, cannot be addressed by these methods.
The currently dominant approach [26, 2] instead em-ploys semantic segmentation to decompose the scene into three semantic classes (water, obstacles and sky), which jointly address static and dynamic obstacles. Nevertheless, the recent detection benchmark [5] indicates that segmen-tation methods could benefit from the detection approach.
A natural approach that combines these two principles is panoptic segmentation [24], which has proven highly ef-fective in the related field of autonomous ground vehi-cles [18, 21, 14, 55]. Unfortunately, panoptic segmentation has not been fully explored for maritime perception, primar-ily due to the lack of a diverse, publicly available, curated panoptic dataset.
Several maritime evaluation [37, 3, 5] and training [4, 15] datasets have been proposed, as shown in Table 1. How-ever, a common drawback of the major evaluation datasets
is that the dynamic obstacles are annotated only with bound-ing boxes, limiting the evaluation capability. Additionally, the current segmentation training datasets [4, 15] are mod-est in size and diversity, and the only reported RGB-based maritime panoptic dataset [38] is private and cannot be uti-lized by the community. Moreover, the scene diversity in individual datasets is fairly low, since they are all captured in limited geographic locations, which hampers the devel-opment of robust maritime obstacle detection methods ca-pable of handling general maritime environments.
We address the aforementioned drawbacks by proposing the first maritime panoptic obstacle detection benchmark.
Our major contribution is the Lakes Rivers and Seas (LaRS) dataset (see Figure 1). LaRS surpasses existing datasets in terms of diversity, obstacle types and acquisition condi-tions. The dataset is composed of over 4000 key frames with panoptic labels for 3 stuff and 8 thing categories, and 19 global scene attributes. Each key frame is equipped with the preceding nine frames to facilitate the development of methods that exploit temporal texture. To ensure equal at-tribute distribution, the training, validation, and test splits were carefully constructed, and we have implemented an online evaluation server to mitigate test-set overfitting.
In addition to the LaRS dataset, our second contribution is the analysis of 19 recent semantic segmentation networks and 8 panoptic segmentation networks. We highlight sev-eral limitations of these methods and identify opportunities for their improvement. The dataset, benchmark, and evalua-tion toolkit will be publicly released, to enable the research community to utilize and build upon our work. 2.