Abstract
Pseudo-Labeling (PL) is a critical approach in semi-supervised 3D object detection (SSOD). In PL, delicately selected pseudo-labels, generated by the teacher model, are provided for the student model to supervise the semi-supervised detection framework. However, such a paradigm may introduce misclassiﬁed labels or loose localized box predictions, resulting in a sub-optimal solution of detec-tion performance. In this paper, we take PL from a noisy learning perspective: instead of directly applying vanilla pseudo-labels, we design a noise-resistant instance super-vision module for better generalization. Speciﬁcally, we soften the classiﬁcation targets by considering both the quality of pseudo labels and the network learning ability, and convert the regression task into a probabilistic mod-eling problem. Besides, considering that self-supervised learning works in the absence of labels, we incorporate dense pixel-wise feature consistency constraints to elim-inate the negative impact of noisy labels. To this end, we propose NoiseDet, a simple yet effective framework for semi-supervised 3D object detection. Extensive ex-periments on competitive ONCE and Waymo benchmarks demonstrate that our method outperforms current semi-supervised approaches by a large margin. Notably, our
NoiseDet achieves state-of-the-art performance under var-ious dataset scales on ONCE dataset.
For example,
NoiseDet improves its NoiseyStudent baseline from 55.5 mAP to 58.0 mAP, and further reaches 60.2 mAP with en-hanced pseudo-label generation. Code will be available at https://github.com/zehuichen123/NoiseDet. 1.

Introduction 3D object detection, aiming at detecting instances in the 3D space, is of great importance in various applications.
Thanks to the large amount of labeled data, it has achieved
∗Corresponding Author
Figure 1. The noisy predictions generated by a well-trained 3D ob-ject detector. Despite carefully tuning the model and ﬁltering low-conﬁdence score predictions, there are still low-quality bounding boxes left. Directly enforcing the detector to learn from such noisy data on an unlabeled dataset can mislead the model convergence or even deteriorate its performance. In the top ﬁgure, we demon-strate an inaccurate heading regression case, and the bottom case shows a false positive prediction. We distinguish the ground truth and model predictions with green and blue, respectively. great success in the past few years [37, 29, 9, 56, 10, 11].
However, labeling a large-scale dataset is extremely time-consuming and labor-intensive [40]. This issue gets much more severe in the 3D object detection task, where 7 degree-of-freedom parameters need to be determined as well as the categorical labels. Therefore, how to further boost the su-pervised detectors with limited labeled datasets remains a practical and urgent problem.
Semi-supervised object detection (SSOD) demonstrates great prospects recently due to its simplicity and weak de-pendence on costly annotations [46, 20, 39]. By lever-aging easily accessible unlabeled data, SSOD approaches enhance the model performance with little human effort
[47, 43, 51, 25]. The strategies of current SSOD can be
categorized into two main streamlines: Mean-Teacher [41] and Pseudo-Labeling [24]. Mean-Teacher adopts a teacher-student paradigm, where the teacher is initialized from the student model via Exponential Moving Average (EMA) to produce supervised signals on the unlabeled data in an end-to-end training fashion.
Inspired by this, more advanced ways, including SESS [55], NoisyStudent [45], are built upon the teacher-student paradigm and achieve signiﬁcant improvements. Despite the superior performance and ele-gant pipeline, they are not model-agnostic (i.e. the teacher and student should be the same model) and miss the chance to pursing high-quality pseudo labels, such as off-board la-bel generation [35]. Another line of work is pseudo la-beling [53, 36]: the model is ﬁrst trained on labeled data and then generated pseudo labels on the unlabeled data for later training. Different from MT, it can be easily applied to any detector without adapting the framework to the teacher-student paradigm. These multi-stage approaches obtain rea-sonably good results, however, the ﬁnal performance is of-ten impeded by the quality of pseudo labels. To address this issue, 3DIoUMatch [42] proposes to estimate the lo-calization accuracy predicted by the network and utilizes it as a metric to guide the label generation. ProﬁcientTeacher
[51] introduces a clustering-based box voting module to ﬁl-ter low-quality predictions without introducing any hand-crafted rule. Although the accuracy of pseudo labels gets greatly improved, it may still fail in certain cases, leading to unstable model convergence. Harsh conﬁdence ﬁltering is proven to be worked well [46], however, we observe that it is still hard to remove all misleading instances for generated labels, which can distract the model convergence, shown in
Figure 1.
In this paper, we acknowledge the existence of noise in the generated labels and take PL as a noisy learning task: instead of directly applying vanilla pseudo-labels, we de-sign a noise-resistant instance supervision module for bet-ter model generalization. Speciﬁcally, for the classiﬁcation branch, we leverage the conﬁdence predictions from the teacher and the student model learning ability to construct soft categorical targets. Different from previous approaches
[47, 28], which simply apply them for loss reweighting, we enforce the network to directly learns from such continual supervision. In this way, our strategy can adaptively learn more knowledge from the teacher’s predictions and at the same time develop tolerance to low conﬁdence score labels.
As for the regression branch, we ﬁnd that solely relying on classiﬁcation scores or IoU predictions is not enough to re-ﬂect the learning quality of each attribute of the 3D box. To mitigate this problem, we convert the original smooth L1 re-gression into a probabilistic modeling task: by enabling the network to output two variables to represent the Gaussian distribution, we maximize the negative log-likelihood of the targets in the distribution. Apart from the label supervi-sion on the unlabeled data, we also introduce a novel dense pixel-wise feature self-supervised consistency constraints to further eliminate the negative impact of noisy data. To this end, we propose NoiseDet, a simple semi-supervised 3D object detection framework to address the noise learning problem from the unlabeled data. Our NoiseDet is modal-agnostic and can be easily applied to any 3D object detector with little modiﬁcation.
We summarize our key contributions as follows:
• Instead of directly improving the quality of pseudo-labels, we formulate SSOD as a noisy learning prob-lem, where we acknowledge the existence of the noise in pseudo-labels and soften the network supervision for model generalization.
• Based on this thought, we propose NoiseDet, a sim-ple yet effective SSOD framework to deal with the noisy data through two core modules: noise-resistant instance supervision and dense pixel-wise feature con-sistency constraint.
• With extensive experiments, we validate the effective-ness of our approach on two competitive benchmarks.
Notably, it achieves state-of-the-art performance on the challenging ONCE dataset. 2.