Abstract
Sparse-view computed tomography (CT)—using a small number of projections for tomographic reconstruction— enables much lower radiation dose to patients and accel-erated data acquisition. The reconstructed images, how-ever, suffer from strong artifacts, greatly limiting their di-agnostic value. Current trends for sparse-view CT turn to the raw data for better information recovery. The re-sultant dual-domain methods, nonetheless, suffer from sec-ondary artifacts, especially in ultra-sparse view scenar-ios, and their generalization to other scanners/protocols is greatly limited. A crucial question arises: have the image post-processing methods reached the limit? Our answer is not yet.
In this paper, we stick to image post-processing methods due to great flexibility and propose global rep-resentation(GloRe) distillation framework for sparse-view
CT, termed GloReDi. First, we propose to learn GloRe with Fourier convolution, so each element in GloRe has an image-wide receptive field. Second, unlike methods that only use the full-view images for supervision, we propose to distill GloRe from intermediate-view reconstructed images that are readily available but not explored in previous lit-erature. The success of GloRe distillation is attributed to two key components: representation directional distillation to align the GloRe directions, and band-pass-specific con-trastive distillation to gain clinically important details. Ex-tensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of the pro-posed GloReDi over the state-of-the-art methods, including dual-domain ones. The source code is available at https:
//github.com/longzilicart/GloReDi. 1.

Introduction
X-ray CT is one of the major modalities widely used in clinical screening and diagnosis. Despite the benefits,
Figure 1. Sparse-view CT only uses a few projection views for tomographic reconstruction, thus providing fast and low-dose CT scanning. However, the reconstruction results of the conventional method suffer from severe global streak artifacts. there have been growing concerns that X-ray radiation ex-posure could increase the risk of cancer induction [47]. Fol-lowing the “As Low As Reasonably Achievable” principle in the medical community [36], efforts have been made to lower the radiation dose while maintaining imaging qual-ity [20]. Sparse-view CT is one of the effective solutions which reduces the radiation by sampling part of the pro-jection data, a.k.a sinogram, for image reconstruction, as shown in Fig. 1. However, analytical reconstruction algo-rithms such as filtered back projection (FBP) produce infe-rior image quality with globally severe streak artifacts, sig-nificantly compromising its diagnosis value. How to effec-tively reconstruct the sparse-view CT remains challenging and, hence, is gaining increasing attention in the computer vision and medical imaging communities.
Image-domain methods regard sparse-view CT recon-struction as an image post-processing task on the FBP-reconstructed images and have achieved exciting perfor-mance on streak artifacts removal and structure preserva-tion [5, 22, 32, 58]. However, due to the limited recep-tive field, these methods have difficulty in modeling global information efficiently, thus leading to suboptimal results.
Current dominant methods turn to the help of sinogram by restoring the sinogram and performing CT image post-processing simultaneously [17, 29, 31, 46]. Specifically, in addition to the image domain methods, deep neural net-works are also applied to interpolate the missing data in sinogram so that the reconstructed images can be recovered in a global manner [10, 25].
Despite the common success of dual-domain methods, they suffer from unsatisfactory and unstable performance due to the following reasons. First, the processing of sino-gram data is sensitive and even subtle changes may remark-ably affect the reconstructed images and introduce stubborn secondary artifacts that are hard to be eliminated. Second, in ultra sparse-view scenarios, inpainting methods are un-able to accurately restore the excessive missing raw data; e.g., inpainting sparse CT data of 18 views to the full CT data of 720 views only retains about 2.5% of the valid in-formation, in which the involvement of sinogram process-ing makes the learning more difficult and compromise the performance [29,46]. Third, it is often impractical to access sinogram data given the privacy and commercial concerns, and if accessible, the requirement of raw data greatly limits the generalization to other scanners/protocols.
Motivation. Given the great flexibility of the image domain methods, we raise a critical question in this paper: have the image domain (post-processing) methods reached the lim-its? Our answer is not yet, given the following observa-tions. First, existing image-domain methods typically suf-fer from limited receptive field, which fails to extract and recover the global information efficiently [43], given that streak artifacts are spread globally on the reconstructed im-ages as shown in Fig. 1. Second, existing image-domain methods only utilize the full-view images as the unique su-pervision on the result [22, 58]. They ignore the impor-tance of representation learning, especially global represen-tation (GloRe), making the artifact removal and detail re-covery entangled, and leading to sub-optimal results due to the significant gap between sparse- and full-view. Third, the intermediate-view reconstructed images can be read-ily available during data preparation, but to the best of our knowledge, they are surprisingly neglected in the past liter-ature. We argue that they can provide extra information and build bridges for sparse- and full-view CT reconstruction.
To address the abovementioned issues, we propose a novel image-domain method for sparse-view CT recon-struction. First, to address the limited receptive field inher-ent in conventional convolutional neural networks, we pro-pose to learn GloRe with fast Fourier convolution (FFC) [7], so each element in GloRe has an image-wide receptive field. This global nature allows artifacts and information, spread over the entire image, to be better modeled while also easing the alignment of the representations from dif-ferent views. Second, to leverage extra supervision from intermediate-view CT images, we propose a novel distil-lation framework to learn better GloRe, termed GloReDi, which contains a parallel teacher network to distill knowl-edge from the readily intermediate-view images to pro-vide high-quality and appropriate guidance for learning the
GloRe of sparse-view CT images. Specifically, we first leverage intermediate-view reconstructed images to train a teacher network, which is then used to guide the learning of the student model (i.e. the sparse-view CT). The distillation scheme benefits GloRe in two folds: (1) representation di-rectional distillation that aligns the directions between the student and teacher GloRe, which provides appropriate su-pervision considering the massive information loss due to the domain gaps between CT images with different views; and (2) band-pass-specific contrastive distillation that uti-lizes contrastive learning solely on the band-pass compo-nents to help distill the specific clinical value of each CT image without compromising the reconstruction accuracy.
Contributions.
In summary, our contributions are listed as follows. First, we propose the global representation (GloRe) learning for sparse-view CT with Fourier convo-lution, which, to the best of our knowledge, is the first study to emphasize on the representation learning for im-age post-processing in sparse-view CT. Second, we propose a novel GloRe distillation framework, which can leverage the extra supervision from intermediate-view reconstructed images for high-quality information recovery and recon-struction. Third, we present representation directional dis-tillation and band-pass-specific contrastive distillation for distilling GloRe to align the representation directions and gain clinically important details. Last, extensive experimen-tal results demonstrate the superiority of GloReDi over the state-of-the-art sparse-view CT reconstruction methods in terms of quantitative metrics and visual comparison. 2. Detailed