Abstract
Latest methods represent shapes with open surfaces us-ing unsigned distance functions (UDFs). They train neural networks to learn UDFs and reconstruct surfaces with the gradients around the zero level set of the UDF. However, the differential networks struggle from learning the zero level set where the UDF is not differentiable, which leads to large errors on unsigned distances and gradients around the zero level set, resulting in highly fragmented and discontinuous surfaces. To resolve this problem, we propose to learn a more continuous zero level set in UDFs with level set pro-jections. Our insight is to guide the learning of zero level set using the rest non-zero level sets via a projection pro-cedure. Our idea is inspired from the observations that the non-zero level sets are much smoother and more continu-ous than the zero level set. We pull the non-zero level sets onto the zero level set with gradient constraints which align gradients over different level sets and correct unsigned dis-tance errors on the zero level set, leading to a smoother and more continuous unsigned distance field. We conduct comprehensive experiments in surface reconstruction for point clouds, real scans or depth maps, and further explore the performance in unsupervised point cloud upsampling and unsupervised point normal estimation with the learned
UDF, which demonstrate our non-trivial improvements over the state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at https:
//github.com/junshengzhou/LevelSetUDF. 1.

Introduction
Surface reconstruction from point clouds plays an im-portant role in vision, robotics and graphics. Recently, neu-ral implicit functions [61, 58, 57] have achieved remarkable
*Equal contribution.
†The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu. results by representing 3D geometries with signed distance functions (SDFs) [51, 13, 73], occupancy [57, 64, 60] or unsigned distance functions (UDFs) [89, 20, 27]. SDFs and occupancy explore the internal-to-external relations, which are limited to reconstruct closed surfaces. Researchers therefore turn to UDFs, which is a more general function, to represent shapes with arbitrary typologies.
Learning an accurate zero level set of UDF is the key factor for representing complex geometries and supporting 3D applications [52, 42, 26, 17]. However, the differential neural networks struggle from learning the zero level set where the UDF is not differentiable. This leads to unstable optimizations, which results in large errors on unsigned dis-tances and gradients around the zero level set, causing fail-ures in downstream 3D applications. Taking surface recon-struction for example, SOTA methods [89, 27] extract sur-faces from UDFs by judging gradient directions around the zero level set, where the unreliable gradients lead to highly fragmented and discontinuous surfaces.
To resolve this issue, we introduce two novel constraints on the zero level set in forms of losses for learning accu-rate UDF without ground truth unsigned distances. The key insight is from the observation that despite the unreliable zero level set, the non-zero level sets learned by UDF are quite convincing, which can serve as an accurate guidance for the optimization on zero level set. We therefore propose the level set projection constraint to achieve a smoother and more continuous zero level set of UDF by enforcing the par-allelism between the gradient of a query in a non-zero level set and the gradient of its projection to the zero level set.
Moreover, we introduce an adaptive weighting strategy to force the neural network to focus more on the optimization nearer to the zero level set.
The level set projection constraint aims to guide the gra-dients at zero level set, where we propose another unsigned distance loss as a supplement for correcting distance errors
at the zero level set. To bring a more robust guidance to the optimization of zero level set, we introduce an addition gradient constraint on queries to learn more accurate and regular non-zero level sets of UDF by encouraging the gra-dient orthogonal to the tangent plane of the surface.
Based on our learned stable UDF with an accurate zero level set, we explore three different 3D applications, includ-ing surface reconstruction, unsupervised point normal esti-mation and unsupervised point cloud upsampling. Our im-provements over unsupervised or even supervised baselines justify both our effectiveness and the importance of an ac-curate and continuous zero level set to the representation ability of neural unsigned fields.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows.
• We propose two novel constraints on UDF to achieve a smoother and more continuous zero level set for learn-ing to represent shapes or scenes without ground truth unsigned distances.
• We justify that an accurate and continuous zero level set is the key factor to represent complex 3D geome-tries and supporting 3D downstream applications.
• We explore three different 3D applications with our learned UDF, including surface reconstruction, unsu-pervised point normal estimation and unsupervised point cloud upsampling, where we show our superior-ity over the state-of-the-art supervised / unsupervised methods. 2.