Abstract
Understanding and manipulating deformable objects (e.g., ropes and fabrics) is an essential yet challenging task with broad applications. Difficulties come from com-plex states and dynamics, diverse configurations and high-dimensional action space of deformable objects. Besides, the manipulation tasks usually require multiple steps to ac-complish, and greedy policies may easily lead to local opti-mal states. Existing studies usually tackle this problem us-ing reinforcement learning or imitating expert demonstra-tions, with limitations in modeling complex states or requir-In this paper, we study ing hand-crafted expert policies. deformable object manipulation using dense visual affor-dance, with generalization towards diverse states, and pro-pose a novel kind of foresightful dense affordance, which avoids local optima by estimating states’ values for long-term manipulation. We propose a framework for learning this representation, with novel designs such as multi-stage stable learning and efficient self-supervised data collection without experts. Experiments demonstrate the superiority of our proposed foresightful dense affordance. Project page: https://hyperplane-lab.github.io/DeformableAffordance 1.

Introduction
Many kinds of deformable objects, such as ropes and fabrics, exist everywhere in our daily life. Perceiving and manipulating deformable objects plays a significant role and paves the way for future home-assistant robots.
Unlike rigid or articulated objects, due to the complex dynamics, high-dimensional and nearly infinite degrees of freedom, large action space, and severe self-occlusion, de-formable objects pose much more challenges to manipulate.
Moreover, unlike tasks for rigid objects (like grasping) or articulated objects (like pushing a door) that require one or only a few steps to accomplish, deformable object ma-nipulation tasks usually require many steps to accomplish,
*Equal contribution, order determined by coin flip.
†Corresponding author
Figure 1. Deformable Object Manipulation has many difficul-ties. 1) It requires multiple steps to complete. 2) Most actions can hardly facilitate tasks, for the exceptionally complex states and dynamics. 3) Many local optimal states are temporarily closer to the target, but making following actions harder to coordinate for the whole task. We propose to learn Foresightful Dense Visual
Affordance aware of future actions to avoid local optima for de-formable object manipulation, with real-world implementations. laying much focus on relationships and influences between actions in a sequence, as an action leading to local optimal states may not eventually complete the task.
Specifically, as shown in Figure 1, unfolding crumpled cloth requires a sequence of actions (pick-and-place). Be-cause of the exceptionally complex states and dynamics, and large action space, most actions fail to facilitate the task.
Moreover, although some cloth in local optimal states tem-porarily have larger coverage areas than others, following actions face difficulties in smoothly completing the task.
Proposed by Gibson [8] and aimed at providing indica-tive information for agents to execute actions (e.g., el-ementary actions such as picking and pulling) and thus facilitating downstream tasks, visual affordance is arous-ing much attention in vision and robotics. Recent works have demonstrated its efficiency in a large range of tasks like grasping [25, 28, 3, 16, 15, 42], manipulating artic-ulated objects [26, 36, 33, 5] and assisting robots in a scene [29, 30, 9]. Among them, point-level dense affor-dance [36, 26, 27, 33] learns whether an action on each point of the object could facilitate the task. Compared with Reinforcement Learning (RL) approaches, dense af-fordance is stably supervised and has better generalization ability towards objects with diverse shapes.
The above dense affordance is suitable for representing deformable objects with complex states, capable of indicat-ing whether diverse actions could help complete the task.
While most previous works only study dense affordance for short-term manipulation on rigid [43] or articulated ob-jects [26, 36], to tackle the local optima problem in multi-step manipulation, we move a step towards equipping dense affordance with foresightfulness for future states.
Inspired by Dynamic Programming with Bellman Equa-tion [1] and Q-Learning [34], estimating a state’s ‘value’ (expected return in the long term, instead of only the cur-rent performance) for future actions to coordinate and even-tually complete the task will help avoid local optimal states and boost the smoothness and quickness of multi-step ma-nipulation. Dense affordance is suitable for such ‘value’ es-timation, because such ‘value’ requires understanding and aggregating a large number of diverse following actions on complex states and their corresponding results.
With such state ‘value’s (instead of only the current per-formance) in supervisions, dense affordance would gain foresightfulness for the future.
We propose to learn dense visual affordance for ma-nipulating deformable objects, and further estimate state
‘value’s by aggregating such affordance to avoid local op-tima and smoothly accomplish multi-step tasks. As shown in Figure 1 (Down), the task can be accomplished smoothly using our proposed dense affordance in the real world.
To learn such representations, we propose a novel frame-work generic to diverse tasks with many novel designs, such as the stage-by-stage stable training and Fold to Un-fold efficient multi-stage data collection. Thus the pro-posed affordance could be learned stably, efficiently, and self-supervisedly without hand-crafted policies for differ-ent tasks. Experiments on representative benchmark tasks demonstrate our framework’s impressive performance.
In summary, our contributions are:
• We propose to use dense visual affordance for ma-nipulating deformable objects with complex states and dynamics, using such representation to estimate state
‘value’s for future actions to avoid local optima and smoothly accomplish multi-step manipulation tasks;
• We propose a self-supervised framework with novel designs such as multi-stage training and efficient data collection to learn the proposed affordance stably;
• Qualitative and quantitative results on representative benchmarks and real-world experiments demonstrate the superiority of our proposed dense visual affordance and learning framework for deformable objects. 2.