Abstract
Although existing image deep learning super-resolution (SR) methods achieve promising performance on bench-mark datasets, they still suffer from severe performance drops when the degradation of the low-resolution (LR) in-put is not covered in training. To address the problem, we propose an innovative unsupervised method of Learn-ing Correction Filter via Degradation-Adaptive Regression for Blind Single Image Super-Resolution. Highly inspired by the generalized sampling theory, our method aims to en-hance the strength of off-the-shelf SR methods trained on known degradations and adapt to unknown complex degra-dations to generate improved results. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst conduct degradation estimation for each local image region by learning the internal distribution in an unsupervised manner via GAN. Instead of assuming degradation are spa-tially invariant across the whole image, we learn correc-tion ﬁlters to adjust degradations to known degradations in a spatially variant way by a novel linearly-assembled pixel degradation-adaptive regression module (DARM). DARM is lightweight and easy to optimize on a dictionary of multi-ple pre-deﬁned ﬁlter bases. Extensive experiments on syn-thetic and real-world datasets verify the effectiveness of our method both qualitatively and quantitatively. Code can be available at: https://github.com/edbca/DARSR. 1.

Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) aims to recover a photo-realistic HR image from its LR counterpart. As a fun-damental computer vision task, SISR has been widely used in various applications, such as enhancing the images’ vi-sual perception on high-resolution devices and improving the image quality for other vision tasks [7]. In recent years,
∗Corresponding author (zhuxiaobin@ustb.edu.cn).
Figure 1. Illustration of most degradation estimation strategies for blindSR and our method. (a) Most methods assume degradations are spatially invariant and estimate a single degradation for the whole image. (b) Our method can learns correction ﬁlters to adjust the degradations to a known degradation in a spatially variant way. a multiplicity of deep learning-based SISR methods have been proposed [33, 18, 25, 52, 51, 8, 29, 54] and achieved substantial performance improvement.
Typically, training and testing LR images in existing
SISR approaches are simulated from a large collection of
HR images. As a pioneer work, Dong et al. [9] ﬁrst intro-duced a three-layer convolutional neural network in SISR to learn LR-HR mapping. Zhang et al. [51] proposed a chan-nel attention mechanism to build a deep model for SISR.
Liang et al.
[22] proposed a baseline model SwinIR for
SISR based on the transformer mechanism. In these meth-ods, the LR images are often generated by limited num-bers of ﬁxed degradations (e.g., Bicubic or blur-downscale).
However, the degradation process in real-world scenarios is extremely complicated and unpredictable. Although exist-ing methods [25, 51, 29, 21, 18, 8] have achieved promis-ing performance, they often encounter severe performance drops when the degradation is not well covered in training.
Recently, many works have attempted to address the challenging degradation adaptation problem by explicit or implicit degradation modeling in a blind or non-blind man-ner. SRMD [48] learns an SR model with training data covering a large set of degradation maps, which are mod-eled with blur kernel and noise. Following SRMD, UDVD
[43] proposes a single uniﬁed dynamic network trained for various degradations to improve performance. However, in most practical applications, blur kernels are not available.
They can hardly deal with the LR inputs with degradations out of their modeling scope. To tackle this problem, some methods [34, 35, 2, 11] estimate a blur kernel from each in-put LR image for adapting to complex degradations. IKC
[12] proposes to correct kernel estimation in an iterative way to approach a satisfactory result gradually. ZSSR [34] learns degradation kernels of LR images via internal statis-tics for every image in a self-supervised manner. Pseudo-supervision [53] combines the forward SR reconstruction path in CinCGAN [44] architecture with degradation learn-ing to deal with the domain shift problem. In addition, Hus-sein et al. [14] proposed a correction ﬁlter strategy on the signal that is sampled by a certain basis can be reconstructed by a different basis, for modifying an LR input to match the
SR model with a pre-deﬁned degradation. These methods’ generalization ability still greatly relies on the accuracy of degradation estimation or training data distribution. In ad-dition, as shown in Fig. 1 (a), they assume degradations are spatially invariant and only estimate a single degradation for the whole image. Such an assumption is rarely applica-ble for real images whose regions (e.g., edges, corners) are discriminative for degradation estimation.
To fully take advantage of the off-the-shelf super-resolvers, we try to robustify the degradation of LR in-put without hurting useful information for efﬁciently adapt-ing to practical applications. A brief illustration and com-parison to the existing degradation estimation strategy for blindSR are presented in Fig. 1. Speciﬁcally, we propose an innovative unsupervised method of learning correction ﬁlter via a linearly-assembled pixel degradation-adaptive regres-sion module (DARM) for correcting the LR image’s degra-dation to the known one in a spatially variant way. Our
DARM is highly lightweight and can be easily optimized over a dictionary of multiple pre-deﬁned ﬁlter bases. In this way, our method can conduct correction ﬁltering and help off-the-shelf SISR models to adapt to complex degradations on every testing image efﬁciently. In addition, we propose a degradation metric (DM) loss to learning to map the un-quantiﬁable degradation in a metric space to guarantee the accuracy of degradation correction.
In summary, our main contributions are three-fold:
• We propose an innovative unsupervised strategy by learning correction ﬁlters for Blind Single Image
Super-Resolution in a spatially variant way, greatly en-hancing the adapting ability of trained super-resolvers to unknown complex degradations.
• We propose a lightweight degradation-adaptive regres-sion module (DARM) that could accurately yet efﬁ-ciently learn correction ﬁlters over a dictionary of mul-tiple pre-deﬁned ﬁlter bases.
• We propose a novel degradation metric (DM) loss via metric learning to map the unquantiﬁable degradation in a metric space to effectively improve the accuracy of degradation correction.
• Extensive experiments on synthetic datasets and real images verify that our method can consistently im-prove the performance of the off-the-shelf super-resolvers both qualitatively and quantitatively. 2.