Abstract
Shape primitives decomposition has been an important and long-standing task in 3D shape analysis. Prior arts heavily rely on 3D point clouds or voxel data for shape primitives extraction, which are less practical in real-world scenarios. This paper proposes to learn shape primitives from multi-view images by introducing implicit surface ren-dering. It is challenging since implicit shapes have a high degree of freedom, which violates the simplicity property of shape primitives.
In this work, a novel regularization term named Implicit Convexity Regularization (ICR) im-posed on implicit primitive learning is proposed to tackle this problem. We start with the convexity definition of gen-eral 3D shapes, and then derive the equivalent expression for implicit shapes represented by signed distance functions (SDFs). Further, instead of directly constraining the out-put SDF values which cause unstable optimization, we al-ternatively impose constraint on second order directional derivatives on line segments inside the shapes, which proves to be a tighter condition for 3D convexity. Implicit primi-tives constrained by the proposed ICR are combined into a whole object via softmax-weighted-sum operation over all primitive SDFs. Experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets show that our method is able to decompose ob-jects into simple and reasonable shape primitives without the need of segmentation labels or 3D data. Code and data is publicly available in https://github.com/ seanywang0408/ICR. 1.

Introduction
Shape primitives extraction aims at decomposing a com-plex object into simple geometry.
It has been a funda-mental task in 3D shape representation [7] which imitates human visual perception, abstraction and understanding of real-world objects, and also facilitates industrial manufac-turing which fabricates complex objects via component as-*Corresponding Author.
Figure 1. We propose a shape primitive decomposition method from multi-view images with a novel Implicit Convexity Regular-ization scheme (ICR), which theoretically guarantees the convex-ity of implicit primitives. Our method generates shape primitives that satisfy simplicity, semantics preserving and fidelity. sembling. There are several fundamental properties for shape primitives: i) simplicity, which means that each prim-itive should be composed of simple geometry; ii) seman-tics, which means that the decomposition should reveal the semantic parts of an object; iii) fidelity, which means that the primitives should fit the original object as close as pos-sible. Prior methods using parameterized shapes as prim-itive basis, such as cuboids [11] and superquadrics [13], could guarantee the simplicity property. However, param-eterized primitives are less expressive due to their limited pre-defined geometry, which generally cause low fidelity.
Though leveraging the flexibility of implicit functions to represent primitives could achieve higher fidelity, it also comes with a drawback that the semantic information gen-erally diminishes during decomposition [5, 9]. Most im-portantly, all prior works require 3D data either for single-object fitting or multi-object learning. These data are not accessible in many cases, which makes them unpractical in real-world applications. In this work, we address this prob-lem by learning implicit primitives from multi-view images.
Learning implicit primitives from multi-view images is an even more challenging task.
It is non-trivial to intro-duce prior implicit primitives [9, 19] into a neural render-ing pipeline due to their specific modeling. Besides, im-plicit shapes without explicit regularization has a high de-gree of freedom, which could hardly meet the requirements of primitives. To this end, we propose a convex regulariza-tion term imposed on a common signed distance function (SDF), which could be readily integrated into any implicit surface reconstruction pipeline, as shown in Figure 1. Con-vexity is a plausible property for primitives. First, it is a subconcept of simplicity, that is, a convex shape is gener-ally regarded as simple (Figure 2). Second, most seman-tic parts are convex (see Figure 5 for example). Therefore convexity regularization benefits semantics preservation in primitive decomposition. Lastly, convexity is welcomed in some industrial manufacturing process, such as 3D printing and furniture making, in which convex parts are first fabri-cated respectively and then adhered into one object.
To derive our implicit convexity regularization, we first start with the general definition of 3D convexity, which is formulated on arbitrary two points inside a shape. Then we tailor this definition to an implicit shape represented by a signed distance function (SDF) without loss of general-ity. This conversion also allows more lightweight computa-tion. Further, to avoid the training instability and oscillation caused by direct constraint on the output SDF value, we tighten the convexity condition by alternatively constrain-ing the second order directional derivatives along a line seg-ment. We theoretically prove that this constraint is a suffi-cient condition for convexity. Besides, using the Finite Dif-ference Method could easily implement this constraint.
With the proposed implicit convexity regularization, each primitive is guaranteed to be convex. We combine all primitives into a whole object by conducting softmax-weighted-sum operation over all primitive SDFs and deriv-ing the object SDF. The object SDF is incorporated into a common implicit surface rendering pipeline [17], allowing primitive decomposition from multi-view images. We ex-periment on both synthetic and real-world datasets, demon-strating the simplicity, semantics and fidelity of our gen-erated primitives, especially on CO3D [21] dataset where prior primitive methods are infeasible without 3D data. 2.