Abstract
Extracting and using class-discriminative features is critical for fine-grained recognition. Existing works have demonstrated the possibility of applying deep CNNs to ex-ploit features that distinguish similar classes. However,
CNNs suffer from problems including frequency bias and loss of detailed local information, which restricts the perfor-mance of recognizing fine-grained categories. To address the challenge, we propose a novel texture branch as com-plimentary to the CNN branch for feature extraction. We innovatively utilize Gabor filters as a powerful extractor to exploit texture features, motivated by the capability of Ga-bor filters in effectively capturing multi-frequency features and detailed local information. We implement several de-signs to enhance the effectiveness of Gabor filters, includ-ing imposing constraints on parameter values and develop-ing a learning method to determine the optimal parameters.
Moreover, we introduce a statistical feature extractor to uti-lize informative statistical information from the signals cap-tured by Gabor filters, and a gate selection mechanism to enable efficient computation by only considering qualified regions as input for texture extraction. Through the integra-tion of features from the Gabor-filter-based texture branch and CNN-based semantic branch, we achieve comprehen-sive information extraction. We demonstrate the efficacy of our method on multiple datasets, including CUB-200-2011,
NA-bird, Stanford Dogs, and GTOS-mobile. State-of-the-art performance is achieved using our approach. 1.

Introduction
Recognizing fine-grained categories (e.g., different flower types or bird species) is challenging due to the sub-tle differences in their visual appearance. Recently, deep neural network technology [17, 8, 31, 57, 52, 12] has made remarkable advancement, allowing for significant progress in extracting deep class-discriminative features for fine-grained recognition [10, 38, 41, 23, 3, 56]. For example,
[54] develops a graph-based module to extract cross-class relationship features. [13, 26] use bilinear pooling to ex-*Corresponding Author ploit high-order features from different networks. [55, 38] leverage multi-scale information to enhance feature effec-tiveness. The success of these methods highlights the cru-cial role of extracting powerful features in distinguishing fine-grained categories.
To exploit class-discriminative features, previous meth-ods [38, 41, 23, 3, 56] have primarily relied on convo-lutional neural networks (CNNs) as the model backbone.
CNNs have achieved significant success in many computer vision tasks. However, due to the following limitations, they may not be sufficient for capturing comprehensive in-formation in fine-grained recognition. First, deep CNNs generally extract information with high receptive fields and resolution-reduced feature maps, leading to the loss of local detailed information that is critical for fine-grained recogni-tion. Second, as discussed in [33, 45, 46], due to the regu-larity of the commonly used activation [45] and loss func-tions [33], CNNs prioritize learning low-frequency compo-nents while ignoring high-frequency components. This bias is detrimental to fine-grained classification, as the ignored high-frequency information, such as ripples and spots in bird feathers, can be important in distinguishing between similar classes. Considering these limitations of CNNs, we suggest that a more powerful feature extractor is required, which should be able to capture local detailed information and multi-frequency comprehensive features that are lost by
CNNs but crucial for fine-grained recognition.
Witnessing the challenge, in this work, we introduce a novel branch that extracts texture features as complimentary to the vanilla CNN features to facilitate fine-grained recog-nition. We employ Gabor filters as the texture extractor in the novel branch. The Gabor filter is a windowed Fourier transform that combines a sinusoidal signal with a Gaussian wave. It is widely used in image processing for extracting low-level texture features [30, 35, 29, 1, 40]. The motiva-tions of using Gabor filters in fine-grained recognition can be illustrated in two-folds. (1) First, Gabor filters are ef-fective in capturing local-detailed information. Previous re-search [5, 6] has found that Gabor functions are similar to the receptive field profiles in the mammalian cortical sim-ple cells. This indicates that Gabor filters can perform the similar function as cortical cells to capture effective and lo-cally detailed texture information, which is critical for rec-ognizing confusing samples. (2) Second, Gabor filters can extract sufficient high-frequency information. A Gabor fil-ter contains a parameter that directly controls the frequency of the extracted information. It is therefore possible to ex-ploit sufficient high-frequency components by constraining the parameters of some filters into a high-value range, over-coming the frequency-bias limitations of traditional CNNs.
Benefiting from these advantages, our introduction of Ga-bor filters enables texture features to be extracted as an ef-fective supplement to the typical CNN features for improv-ing fine-grained recognition.
Utilizing Gabor filters in an effective manner is non-trivial. Previous methods with Gabor filters generally rely on hand-crafted designs for filter parameter setting, which cannot guarantee to be optimal. To overcome this limita-tion, we propose an approach to automatically learn param-eters in a supervised manner, in which a value constraint strategy is used to stabilize the learning and enhance high-frequency information extraction. To extract effective in-formation with Gabor filters, we further propose a statis-tical feature extractor to capture texture features from the
Gabor response maps. We also introduce a gate mechanism that selects a limited number of appropriate regions as in-puts to the texture branch, thereby reducing computational costs and avoiding information redundancy. These careful designs allow Gabor filters to benefit fine-grained recogni-tion in an effective and efficient manner.
To the best of our knowledge, our work pioneers to learn texture features using Gabor filters in the task of fine-grained recognition. We perform extensive experiments on four datasets, which demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. Benefiting from the powerful texture features from the Gabor filters, our network can leverage the informative and comprehensive information for recognition, resulting in state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance on all datasets. To summarize, our contributions are as follows. (1) First, we pioneer learning Gabor filters in fine-grained recognition.
The texture features extracted from Gabor filters serve as an effective supplement to the vanilla CNN features, sig-nificantly improving recognition performance. (2) Second, to enhance model effectiveness and efficiency, we imple-ment several key designs based on Gabor filters, including the parameter learning method, a powerful Gabor feature extractor and a region selection gate. (3) Third, extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method with state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance achieved on four datasets. 2.