Abstract 1.

Introduction
Deep learning is commonly used to reconstruct HDR im-ages from LDR images. LDR stack-based methods are used for single-image HDR reconstruction, generating an HDR image from a deep learning-generated LDR stack. However, current methods generate the stack with predetermined ex-posure values (EVs), which may limit the quality of HDR reconstruction. To address this, we propose the continuous exposure value representation (CEVR), which uses an im-plicit function to generate LDR images with arbitrary EVs, including those unseen during training. Our approach gen-erates a continuous stack with more images containing di-verse EVs, signiﬁcantly improving HDR reconstruction. We use a cycle training strategy to supervise the model in gen-erating continuous EV LDR images without corresponding ground truths. Our CEVR model outperforms existing meth-ods, as demonstrated by experimental results.
High dynamic range (HDR) images can capture detailed appearances in regions with extreme lighting conditions, like sun and shadow. As conventional cameras only capture a limited dynamic range in real-world scenes, one approach to address this issue is to blend multiple LDR images with different exposures into a single HDR image. However, this method is limited to static scenes and may result in ghosting or blurring artifacts in dynamic scenes. Additionally, this method is not applicable when multiple images of the same scene are unavailable, such as an image on the internet.
Another branch of methods, e.g., [12, 13, 23, 24, 26, 32, 43], takes a single LDR image as input to generate the HDR counterpart without suffering from misalignment, which is referred to as single-image HDR reconstruction. These ap-proaches, e.g., [23,24], are trained on particular datasets and build an LDR stack with a single LDR image to generate an
HDR image using Debevec’s method [11].
EV stack of real images
PSNR
RH’s TMO
σ m
PSNR
KK’s TMO
σ m
[-2, 0, 2]
[-2, -1.3, 0, 1.3, 2]
[-2, -1.3, -0.7, 0, 0.7, 1.3, 2] 24.96 25.15 25.32 3.18 2.98 3.01 23.52 23.71 23.92 2.75 3.12 3.04
HDR-VDP-2 m 45.12 45.26 45.51
σ 5.74 5.12 4.86
[-2, 0, 2 ]
[-2, -1.3, 0, 1.3, 2 ]
[-2, -1.3, -0.7, 0, 0.7, 1.3, 2 ]
Ground Truth
Figure 2: Motivation. We observe that an LDR stack with dense EVs improves HDR reconstruction even with the same exposure range (from -2EV to +2EV). A list “[-2,0,2]” means the stack contains three LDR images with -2, 0, and 2 EVs. An example of visual comparison is given.
Using more LDR images with richer EVs improves
HDR image quality, as demonstrated in Fig. 2 with dif-ferent EV stack settings using Debevec’s method on the real LDR images of the HDREye dataset [36]. We com-pare tone-mapping operators RH [39] and KK [20] and use
HDR-VDP-2 to evaluate HDR quality. However, accessi-ble datasets have predeﬁned and quantized EVs and may not cover optimal values for HDR reconstruction, causing information loss.
Previous studies [8, 35, 46] show the effectiveness of im-plicit neural representations in modeling continuous rela-tionships, motivating our research. Inspired by the observa-tion in Fig. 2, we address the issue of predeﬁned, quantized
EVs by leveraging an implicit neural function to model re-lationships between image appearance and continuous EVs.
It turns out our method can generate LDR images with arbi-trary EVs even if the corresponding ground truth is unavail-able. More importantly, LDR stacks enriched by images with these continuous and dense EVs can reconstruct HDR images of better quality.
Speciﬁcally, the proposed approach, continuous expo-sure value representation (CEVR), exploits an implicit neu-ral function to generate LDR images with continuous expo-sure values, as shown in Fig. 1(a). Based on the ﬂexibility of our CEVR model, we further develop two strategies, cy-cle training and continuous stack, to improve the quality of the LDR stack and the ﬁnal HDR result.
Cycle training utilizes CEVR to generate continuous
EV images without relying on direct supervision from cor-responding ground truths. We train the model using two continuous EVs that sum up to a predeﬁned EV, with the proportion of these two continuous EVs randomly sampled.
This strategy enforces the cycle consistency constraint, im-proving the model’s ability to synthesize images with vary-ing EVs and enhancing the quality of the LDR stack. We then use the enriched LDR stack containing seen and unseen
EVs in training data for Debevec’s method to produce more accurate inverse camera response functions (CRFs) and vi-sually appealing tone-mapped images (Fig. 1(c)) compared to previous methods [23, 24] (Fig. 1(b)).
Extensive evaluations demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed continuous stack and cycle training on the
VDS [23] and HDREye [36] datasets. Both quantitative and qualitative evaluations show that CEVR signiﬁcantly out-performs existing methods. The following summarizes our three primary contributions:
• We propose the CEVR approach, which can generate
LDR images with continuous exposure values by mod-eling relationships between image appearances and ex-posure values.
• With the ﬂexibility of the CEVR model, we design a training strategy, cycle training, to explore continuous
EV information and enhance the quality of the esti-mated LDR stack.
• We propose the continuous stack, which consists of
LDR images with continuous and dense exposure val-ues and can improve the quality of ﬁnal HDR images. 2.