Abstract
Unsupervised semantic segmentation is a long-standing challenge in computer vision with great significance. Spec-tral clustering is a theoretically grounded solution to it where the spectral embeddings for pixels are computed to construct distinct clusters. Despite recent progress in en-hancing spectral clustering with powerful pre-trained mod-els, current approaches still suffer from inefficiencies in spectral decomposition and inflexibility in applying them to the test data. This work addresses these issues by casting spectral clustering as a parametric approach that employs neural network-based eigenfunctions to produce spectral embeddings. The outputs of the neural eigenfunctions are further restricted to discrete vectors that indicate clustering assignments directly. As a result, an end-to-end NN-based paradigm of spectral clustering emerges. In practice, the neural eigenfunctions are lightweight and take the features from pre-trained models as inputs, improving training effi-ciency and unleashing the potential of pre-trained models for dense prediction. We conduct extensive empirical stud-ies to validate the effectiveness of our approach and observe significant performance gains over competitive baselines on
Pascal Context, Cityscapes, and ADE20K benchmarks. The code is available at https://github.com/thudzj/
NeuralEigenfunctionSegmentor. 1.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is essential in understanding the inherent structure and fine-grained information of images.
However, current approaches often hinge on a vast amount of manual annotations to train neural networks (NNs) effec-tively in an end-to-end manner [5, 40]. This is problematic, as obtaining these annotations can be both time-consuming and costly, particularly in fields such as autonomous driving and medical image processing, where annotations are usu-ally collected from domain experts. Thus, finding a way to perform semantic segmentation without manual annotation remains a crucial unresolved problem.
Unsupervised semantic segmentation has recently at-tracted a great deal of attention. A number of methods at-tempt to tackle it by learning fine-grained image features using self-supervised objectives and then applying cluster-ing or grouping techniques [46, 41]. They tend to recog-nize single objects or single semantic categories and strug-gle with complex images. Other approaches have tried to use vision-language cross-modal models (e.g., CLIP [35]) to achieve zero-shot semantic segmentation [48, 39], but they heavily rely on carefully-tuned text prompts and self-training. Compared to the recent approaches, the classic spectral clustering [38], which has stood the test of time, remains an appealing option. In particular, it enjoys solid foundations in spectral graph theory—it finds the minimum cut of the connectivity graph over pixels.
However, traditional spectral clustering exhibits limita-tions in three aspects: (i) it operates on raw image pix-els, thus is sensitive to color transformations and unable to recognize semantic similarities; (ii) it is computation-ally inefficient due to the involved spectral decomposition; (iii) unlike NN-based methods, it is nontrivial and costly to extend to non-training samples because of its transductive manner. Thus it cannot be performed end-to-end in the test phase. Recent work reveals that pre-trained models such as
ViTs [14] can mitigate the first limitation, significantly im-proving the applicability and effectiveness of spectral clus-tering [30]. Its core contribution is to build the connectivity graph over image patches based on an affinity matrix com-puted with the dense features from pre-trained models. Still, the limitations regarding efficiency and flexibility remain.
The present paper aims to overcome the remaining lim-itations, rendering spectral clustering a simple yet effec-tive baseline for unsupervised semantic segmentation. To tackle the inefficiency issue, we propose to cast the involved spectral decomposition problem as an NN-based optimiza-tion one using the recently developed neural eigenfunction (NeuralEF) technique [12]. Concretely, we first measure the similarities between image patches using both the features extracted from pre-trained models and raw pixels. Treat-ing the similarity matrix (or its variants) as the output of a
kernel function, we then optimize NNs to approximate its principal eigenfunctions. Consequently, our method consti-tutes an NN-based counterpart of spectral embedding. We eliminate the need for an additional grouping step, which is required in prior work [30], by constraining the NN out-put to one-hot vectors that indicate clustering assignments directly. To accomplish this, we use the Gumbel-Softmax estimator [20] for gradient-based optimization during train-ing. These strategies transform spectral clustering from a non-parametric approach to a parametric one, enabling easy and reliable out-of-sample generalization and avoiding solving complex matrix eigenvalue problems during testing.
We perform extensive studies to evaluate the effective-ness of our approach for unsupervised semantic segmenta-tion. We first experiment on the popularly used benchmarks
Pascal Context [31] and Cityscapes [9] based on pre-trained
ViTs, and report superior results compared to leading meth-ods MaskCLIP [48] and ReCo [39]. We further consider the sliding-window-based evaluation protocol [40] and experi-ment on the challenging ADE20K dataset [47] to system-atically study the behavior of our method. In addition, we conduct thorough ablation studies to gain insights into the specification of several core hyper-parameters. 2.