Abstract
Shape assembly aims to reassemble parts (or fragments) into a complete object, which is a common task in our daily life. Different from the semantic part assembly (e.g., assem-bling a chair’s semantic parts like legs into a whole chair), geometric part assembly (e.g., assembling bowl fragments into a complete bowl) is an emerging task in computer vi-sion and robotics. Instead of semantic information, this task focuses on geometric information of parts. As the both ge-ometric and pose space of fractured parts are exceptionally large, shape pose disentanglement of part representations is beneficial to geometric shape assembly. In our paper, we propose to leverage SE(3) equivariance for such shape pose disentanglement. Moreover, while previous works in vision and robotics only consider SE(3) equivariance for the rep-resentations of single objects, we move a step forward and propose leveraging SE(3) equivariance for representations considering multi-part correlations, which further boosts the performance of the multi-part assembly. Experiments demonstrate the significance of SE(3) equivariance and our proposed method for geometric shape assembly. Project page: https://crtie.github.io/SE-3-part-assembly/ 1.

Introduction
Shape assembly aims to compose the parts or fragments of an object into a complete shape.
It is a common task in the human-built world, from furniture assembly [16, 36] (e.g., assemble chair parts like legs and handles into a whole chair) to fractured object reassembly [5, 24] (e.g., assemble bowl fractures into a whole bowl) . When trying to complete an object from parts, we will focus on their geometric and semantic information.
There is a vast literature in both the computer vision and robotics fields studying the shape assembly problem, espe-cially for the application purposes like furniture assembly
*Equal contribution, order determined by coin flip.
†Corresponding author
Figure 1. Geometric Shape Assembly aims to assemble different fractured parts into a whole shape. We propose to leverage SE(3)
Equivariance for learning Geometric Shape Assembly, which dis-entangles poses and shapes of fractured parts, and performs better than networks without SE(3)-equivariant representations. and object assembly [1, 16, 19, 36]. Imagine we want to assemble a simple table with four wooden sticks and a flat board, we can infer that the sticks are the table legs so they should be vertically placed, while the board is the table top and should be horizontally placed. Here, we not only use geometric clues to infer the parts’ functions but also use se-mantic information to predict the parts’ poses.
Recently, a two-part geometric mating dataset is pro-posed in NSM [5], which considers shape assembly from a pure geometric perspective, without relying on semantic information. This work randomly cuts an object into two pairs, and studies how to mate the fragment pairs into the original shape. Such design is practical in some applications such as object kitting [7, 18], form fitting [35], and pro-tein binding [27]. In these tasks, the semantic information can hardly be acquired from the fragment shapes, and thus it is nearly impossible to predict fragments’ poses relying on semantic information (e.g. part acts as a leg should be horizontally placed). Instead, such geometric mating tasks should be accomplished by relying on geometric cues.
Furthermore, the pairwise assembly task can be extended to the multi-part assembly task, and thus the pose space will grow much larger. Recent work [24] proposes a large-scale dataset named Breaking Bad, which models the destruction process of how an object breaks into fragments. For each object, there are multiple broken fragments with various and complex geometry, making it much more challenging for geometric shape understanding and assembly. There-fore, how to reduce the pose space and effectively assembly multiple fragments that are non-semantic but with diverse geometry still remains a problem.
Compared to furniture assembly, which relies on both part semantics and geometry, geometric assembly that as-sembles diverse fractures mainly focuses on geometric in-formation, while the space of part pose and geometry are much larger in this task. Therefore, shape pose disentan-glement plays a significant role in boosting the performance of geometric shape assembly.
Recently, achieving SE(3) equivariance for object repre-sentations is arousing much attention in 3D computer vision and robotics. Many works have studied SE(3)-equivariant architectures [3, 4, 6, 8, 13, 28, 29, 30, 38] and leveraged
SE(3) equivariance in object pose estimation [17, 21] or robotic object manipulation [14, 23, 25, 26, 32]. SE(3) equivariance is suitable for the disentangling of shapes and poses of parts in geometric shape assembly. Specifically, like previous works [5, 24], we formulate the shape as-sembly task as a pose prediction problem, and the target is to predict the canonical SE(3) pose for each given frag-ment to compose a whole shape. For every single fragment, the predicted pose transformation should be equivariant to its original pose, while being invariant to other fragments’ poses. Accordingly, the learned representations have two main features: consistency and stability. Consistency means that parts with the same geometry but different poses should have equivariant representations, while stability means the representation of a specific part should be invariant to all other parts’ poses and only related to their geometry char-acteristics. Leveraging such properties, the network can re-duce the large pose space of the complex geometric shape assembly task and thus focus on the fragments’ geometric information for shape assembly.
While most previous works in vision and robotics only leverage SE(3) equivariance representations on a single shape, there exist multiple complex fractured parts in our geometric shape assembly task, and extracting other parts’ geometric information is essential to a successful reassem-bly. How to leverage SE(3)-equivariant representations for multi-parts shape assembly is not a trivial problem, as learned part representations should not only consider the certain part, but also consider correlations with other parts (e.g., whether the notches of two parts match each other), while keeping the equivariance property. We propose to uti-lize both equivariant and invariant representations of sin-gle parts to compose the equivariant part representations in-cluding part correlations. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to leverage the SE(3) equivariance property among multiple objects.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
• We propose to leverage SE(3) equivariance that disen-tangles shapes and poses of fractured parts for geomet-ric shape assembly.
• Utilizing both SE(3)-equivariant and -invariant repre-sentations, we learn SE(3)-equivariant part representa-tions with part correlations for multi-part assembly.
• Experiments on representative benchmarks, including both two-part and multi-part 3D geometric shape as-sembly, demonstrate the superiority of SE(3) equivari-ance and our proposed method. 2.