Abstract
Images captured with irregular exposures inevitably present unsatisfactory visual effects, such as distorted hue and color tone. However, most recent studies mainly fo-cus on underexposure correction, which limits their ap-plicability to real-world scenarios where exposure levels vary. Furthermore, some works to tackle multiple expo-sure rely on the encoder-decoder architecture, resulting in losses of details in input images during down-sampling and up-sampling processes. With this regard, a novel cor-rection algorithm for multiple exposure, called luminance-aware color transform (LACT), is proposed in this study.
First, we reason the relative exposure condition between images to obtain luminance features based on a luminance comparison module. Next, we encode the set of transfor-mation functions from the luminance features, which en-able complex color transformations for both overexposure and underexposure images. Finally, we project the trans-formed representation onto RGB color space to produce exposure correction results. Extensive experiments demon-strate that the proposed LACT yields new state-of-the-arts on two multiple exposure datasets. Code is available at https://github.com/whdgusdl48/LACT. 1.

Introduction
Exposure is a crucial component in image formation. So, images captured with improper exposures usually have un-satisfactory visual effects, such as distorted hue and bright-ness. Figure 1 shows examples of images captured with overexposure and underexposure, which can cause overly bright or darkened regions, leading to significant degrada-tion of image quality. Many methods [3, 21, 1, 22, 8, 23, 41, 20] have been proposed to correct exposure-related is-sues. However, most of them have focused on correcting
∗Corresponding author
†These authors contributed equally to this work. either overexposure or underexposure, limiting their appli-cability to real-world scenarios with various exposure lev-els. Some studies [2, 14, 35, 15] have attempted to address both overexposure and underexposure cases, leveraging the
U-Net [31] like architecture. While these methods have shown improved performance, they still suffer from limita-tions such as the down-sampling and up-sampling processes in their approaches, resulting in the loss of image details.
The transformation function-based approach has gained much attention in image enhancement [10, 20, 19, 39]. This approach estimates transformation functions for color chan-nels and performs color transformation based on the pre-dicted functions. These methods are free from the down-sampling and up-sampling processes, thereby preserving the image details. However, they are still vulnerable to mul-tiple exposures, since they do not exploit exposure informa-tion explicitly. Also, as shown in Figure 1, a single transfor-mation function may not be sufficient to address both over-exposed or underexposed images, particularly those con-taining saturated regions.
In this work, we present a novel approach, named luminance-aware color transform (LACT), to tackle the problem of multiple exposure correction. The proposed method leverages two key insights - the critical role of lumi-nance for correcting images with multiple exposure levels, and the need to overcome the limitation of single intensity transformation function. To this end, the proposed method extracts luminance features, which encode exposure levels in input images, by exploiting the luminance order relation-ship between two randomly sampled input images. The luminance features are used in the luminance-aware color transform to estimate the sets of transformation functions from the local structure, enabling complex color transform for both overexposure and underexposure images. Then, the proposed method generates a multi-channel representation for exposure correction using the set of transformation func-tions. Finally, a post-processing module projects this multi-channel representation onto the RGB color space to produce correction results. Extensive experiments on ME [2] and
(a) Standard intensity transformation (b) The proposed luminance-aware color transform
Figure 1. Examples of multiple exposure correction with the standard intensity transformation and the proposed luminance-aware color transformation.
SICE [6] datasets demonstrate that the proposed method significantly outperforms state-of-the-arts [14, 15] in mul-tiple exposure correction.
The main contributions of our work are three folds:
• We propose the luminance comparison module that leverages the luminance order relationship to extract the effective luminance feature.
• We propose the luminance-aware color transform based on the luminance feature to obtain reliable cor-rection results for both underexposure and overexpo-sure images.
• We experimentally show the effectiveness of our ap-proach in multiple exposure correction. Our method surpasses recent state-of-the-arts on the ME [2] and
SICE [6] datasets. 2.