Abstract
Multi-view hierarchical clustering (MCHC) plays a piv-otal role in comprehending the structures within multi-view data, which hinges on the skillful interaction between hier-archical feature learning and comprehensive representation learning across multiple views. However, existing methods often overlook this interplay due to the simple heuristic ag-glomerative strategies or the decoupling of multi-view rep-resentation learning and hierarchical modeling, thus lead-ing to insufficient representation learning. To address these issues, this paper proposes a novel Multi-view Hierarchi-cal Clustering Network (MHCN) model by performing si-multaneous multi-view learning and hierarchy modeling.
Specifically, to uncover efficient tree-like structures among all views, we derive multiple hyperbolic autoencoders with latent space mapped onto the Poincar´e ball. Then, the cor-responding hyperbolic embeddings are further regularized to achieve the multi-view representation learning principles for both view-common and view-private information, and to ensure hyperbolic uniformity with a well-balanced hier-archy for better interpretability. Extensive experiments on real-world and synthetic multi-view datasets have demon-strated that our method can achieve state-of-the-art hierar-chical clustering performance, and empower the clustering results with good interpretability. 1.

Introduction
Clustering is one of the fundamental research topics in data analysis [28, 44, 51]. With the advances in data acqui-sition, lots of real-world data could be presented by multi-ple views, e.g., different visual descriptors like GIST [48]
+ Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG) [13] + other
*This work was done when Fangfei Lin was an intern at Tencent.
†Corresponding authors.
Figure 1: Comparison between prior MVHC methods, i.e., MHC and CMHHC, versus our proposed MHCN. (a)
MHC calculates the average cosine distance matrix of all views and agglomerates the nearest neighbors according to the simply-aligned similarity matrix. (b) CMHHC per-forms multi-view alignment and similarity learning in the
Euclidean space, and hierarchical clustering in hyperbolic space, separately. (c) Our MHCN, a one-stage pipeline, directly aligns the latent hierarchies on different Poincar´e balls, leading to more effective MVHC trees. deep features [53] for an image. Multiple views contain both congruent and incongruent information, which can be leveraged to explore potential consistency and complemen-tarity across views and provide more comprehensive la-tent representations to facilitate downstream tasks, espe-cially for unsupervised learning. This leads to the preva-lence of multi-view clustering including multi-view parti-tional clustering [29, 35, 39, 49, 59] and multi-view hierar-chical clustering [37, 68]. Aiming for high interpretability, multi-view hierarchical clustering is particularly appealing in the analysis of multi-view data at various levels of gran-ularity. For instance, gene expression analysis [36] inte-grates multi-omics data and clusters cells into an organi-zation/organ/system hierarchy. Besides, species trees [17], gathering animals by their physical appearances, sounds, or other features, reflect the hierarchical organization in phy-logenetic inference.
Despite these merits, there are still significant limitations in existing multi-view hierarchical clustering methods. As shown in Figure 1, existing models for solving the MVHC problem include the discrete linkage-based method Multi-view Hierarchical Clustering (MHC) [68], and the continu-ous deep neural network-based Contrastive Multi-view Hy-perbolic Hierarchical Clustering (CMHHC) [37]. As a sem-inal work for MVHC, shallow MHC partitions multi-view data at multiple levels through the cosine distance integra-tion and the nearest neighbor agglomeration components.
However, without applying deep representation learning, this method simply considers the mean latent feature vec-tors as the common representations of all views. Thus, it cannot fully capture the consistency and complementar-ity among different views, leading to degenerated HC per-formance, especially on complicated real-world datasets.
The two-stage deep model CMHHC integrates a multi-view alignment learning module, an aligned feature similarity learning module, and a continuous hyperbolic hierarchi-cal clustering module. However, CMHHC takes into ac-count two independent geometry settings, treating multi-view learning in the Euclidean space and HC in hyperbolic space, enlarging the gap between the two processes. Thus, the performance may still be suboptimal.
To address these issues, this paper proposes the
Multi-view Hierarchical Clustering Network (MHCN), as sketched in Figure 2. Taking the desired MVHC tree struc-tures into consideration, we make corresponding designs for
MHCN as follows. Firstly, drawing inspiration from the re-cent success of latent hyperbolic anatomy [42, 52], which excels in modeling hierarchies with minimal distortion, we incorporate multiple hyperbolic autoencoders to capture the inherent hierarchies present in different views. Secondly, considering multi-view consistent and complementary prin-ciples [34, 66], we design the multi-view alignment loss between two arbitrary views to discover the view-common information, and use the reconstruction loss to retain the view-private information, respectively. Thirdly, uniformly-distributed hyperbolic embeddings on the Poincar´e ball cre-ate well-balanced trees, leading to more interpretable se-In order to im-mantics compared with skewed ones. prove interpretability in clustering trees, we encourage the balanced hierarchy construction via a hyperbolic unifor-mity loss, which facilitates learning such hyperbolic em-beddings. In this way, MHCN provides explicit guidance for ensuring the quality of the tree structure and integrates multi-view representation learning and hierarchy discovery processes on hyperbolic manifolds with hierarchy-friendly hyperbolic autoencoders. As the pioneering one-stage so-lution for the MVHC problem, the MHCN model collec-tively optimizes the three objectives with mini-batch train-ing. Thus, large datasets can be efficiently processed. Af-ter obtaining the optimal hyperbolic hierarchical representa-tions for unseen data with trained neural networks, MHCN can decode back to the underlying tree structures, making inductive hierarchical clustering possible.
Different from existing MVHC models, our contribu-tions are summarized as follows.
• We analyze the multi-view hierarchical clustering problem and propose a novel hyperbolic neural network-based model to tackle the problem, where the latent space is grafted on the Poincar´e ball of hyper-bolic space for explicit hierarchical structures.
• We introduce three objectives to facilitate the final multi-view hierarchical clustering trees with desired properties, i.e., a multi-view alignment loss, a recon-struction loss, and a hyperbolic uniformity loss.
• We conduct extensive experiments to show the supe-riority of MHCN compared with other multi-view HC methods in terms of both effectiveness and scalability. 2.