Abstract
For a generalized (or non-central) camera model, the minimal problem for two views of six points has efficient solvers. However, minimal problems of three views with four points and three views of six lines have not yet been explored and solved, despite the efforts from the computer vision community. This paper develops the formulations of these two minimal problems and shows how state-of-the-art GPU implementations of Homotopy Continuation solver can be used effectively. The proposed methods are evalu-ated on both synthetic and real datasets, demonstrating that they are fast, accurate and that they improve on structure from motion estimations, when employed in an hypothesis and test setting. 1.

Introduction
In both the central and the non-central camera models, an image point is in correspondence to a ray of a 3D point that projects to that image point. In the central camera model, each such ray goes through a common point, i.e., the camera centre, whereas in the non-central camera model, two such rays do not always intersect. One example of a non-central camera is the catadioptric camera, where one or more lenses and/or mirrors are combined in an optical system, [17]. An-other example is a rig of multiple cameras, [20]. A typical use-case is a car or drone equipped with several cameras.
Here it is possible to use all of the cameras as one general-ized sensor. Generalized cameras offer several advantages over the standard pinhole camera for relative pose estima-tion. As shown in previous works [20, 25, 10, 15], struc-ture from motion estimation with a generalized camera also gives the scale of the translation as well as the scale of the 3D model. In addition, since the system consists of multi-ple cameras, it is possible to configure the location of each camera so that a maximal field-of-view can be achieved to avoid blind spots. This, in turn, enables more robust image
† Equal contribution.
Figure 1. An example of a multi-camera system with four standard pinhole cameras mounted on a car. feature detection and matching, which is a crucial proce-dure in relative pose estimation. Fig. 1 shows an example of a multi-camera system consisting of four pinhole cam-eras mounted on a car for relative pose estimation.
Unlike the standard pinhole camera, the light rays from a generalized camera do not intersect at a single center of projection. This property makes it non-trivial to estimate the relative pose using a generalized camera. Pless [20] first formulated the light rays in a generalized camera as
Pl¨ucker vectors and defined the generalized essential ma-trix. Based on the work of Pless, several solutions to the two-view generalized relative pose estimation have been proposed [26, 10, 25]. Among these solutions, the mini-mal solver with up to 64 solutions was proposed in [25].
This solver only needs 6 point correspondences which can significantly reduce the number of RANSAC [7] iterations than other solvers. Although the solvers to the two-view generalized relative pose problem are already mature, there are no solutions to the three-view case as the generalized three-view relative pose problem is extremely difficult to be formulated and solved. In general, three-view relative pose estimation needs fewer point correspondence and suf-fers from fewer degenerate cases than the two-view case.
Moreover, three-view relative pose can be estimated only using the line correspondences. Hence, it has a great po-Point
•
Line
Quiver
No. of
Solutions 4-point 6-line 3-quiver 2P3L 2P1L1Q 4L1Q 2L2Q 4 0 0 2 2 0 0 0 6 0 3 1 4 2 0 0 3 0 1 1 2 583 600 1008 920 1472 1976 2240
Table 1. Possible cases and number of solutions for the generalized three-view relative pose problem. Each row shows the number of necessary features and the number of solutions. We mainly focus on the first two cases in this paper since they are more practical and relevant. tential and can provide new ways to solve the relative pose problem.
The generalized three-view relative pose problem has 12 degrees of freedom (6 for the two rotations and 6 for the two translations). It is well known that the most commonly used features for relative pose estimation are points, lines and quivers, where a quiver consists of one point with tan-gent direction (or one point with one line passing through this point). According to the analyses in [5, 6], point, line and quiver in three views can provide 3,2 and 4 constraints, respectively. In Table 1, we show that there are 7 possible minimal cases for generalized three-view relative pose es-timation using the combination of the three features. We only assume that there is one line passing through the point, there will be much more cases if there are several lines pass-ing through one point.
In this paper, to estimate the generalized three-view rel-ative pose, we focus on the first two cases in Table 1. We show detailed discussions on the formulations and the num-ber of solutions for each case. The main contributions of this paper include:
• We solve the generalized three-view relative pose problem using 4 points or 6 lines. Specifically, de-tailed problem formulation for the two cases are given, which are then converted into solving a squared system of polynomials.
• This allows us to develop a solver using HC (homo-topy continuation) based on the state-of-the-art GPU-HC solver [2, 3]. This significantly improves the effi-ciency over the existing modern HC software.
• In extensive synthetic and real experiments we show an improvement of accuracy over the state-of-the-art two-view 6-point solver. The proposed 4-point solver is able to deal with semi-pure translation, which is de-generated for the two-view case. 2.