Abstract
Single-frame infrared small target (SIRST) detection aims at separating small targets from clutter backgrounds on infrared images. Recently, deep learning based meth-ods have achieved promising performance on SIRST de-tection, but at the cost of a large amount of training data with expensive pixel-level annotations. To reduce the an-notation burden, we propose the ﬁrst method to achieve
SIRST detection with single-point supervision. The core idea of this work is to recover the per-pixel mask of each target from the given single point label by using clustering approaches, which looks simple but is indeed challenging since targets are always insalient and accompanied with background clutters. To handle this issue, we introduce ran-domness to the clustering process by adding noise to the input images, and then obtain much more reliable pseudo masks by averaging the clustered results. Thanks to this
“Monte Carlo” clustering approach, our method can ac-curately recover pseudo masks and thus turn arbitrary ful-ly supervised SIRST detection networks into weakly super-vised ones with only single point annotation. Experiments on four datasets demonstrate that our method can be ap-plied to existing SIRST detection networks to achieve com-parable performance with their fully-supervised counter-parts, which reveals that single-point supervision is strong enough for SIRST detection. Our code will be avail-https://github.com/YeRen123455/ able at:
SIRST-Single-Point-Supervision. 1.

Introduction
Single-frame infrared small target (SIRST) detection has been widely used in many applications such as ma-rine resource utilization [23, 45], high-precision naviga-tion [34, 13], and ecological environment monitoring [35].
Figure 1. Pipeline of our method. The proposed Monte Carlo linear clustering along with single-point annotation can produce high-quality pseudo mask (i.e., target probability map (TPM)).
However, existing SIRST detection methods mainly rely on segmentation pipeline with pixel-level supervision. Pixel-level annotating is time-consuming and thus hinders the quick deployment of those large scale data-dependent sce-narios. Therefore, it is in urgent need to alleviate the annota-tion burden while maintaining state-of-the-art performance in SIRST detection.
Point-level supervision, as an annotation-friendly for-m of supervision, can provide both category and localiza-tion information for each target. Previous works in gen-eral object segmentation utilized rich semantic informa-tion to design various training loss [4] and network mod-ules [29, 27], and continuously expand the single-point an-notation to a pixel-level pseudo mask. Although having achieved promising performance, these methods heavily re-ly on prior semantic information (e.g., objectness prior in
[4, 50], shape prior in [29, 27, 49]), and generally need more than one point as supervision. However, infrared s-mall targets generally occupy no more than 0.15% area of the whole image [47] and lack texture, shape and color in-formation. Consequently, previous semantic information-dependent methods cannot well adopt to this task. 1
taion.
• Inspired by the inherent characteristic of SIRST, a sim-ple yet effective linear clustering approach with ran-dom noise-guided Monte Carlo regularization is pro-posed to coarsely extract and further reﬁne the candi-date target region.
• Experiments on four public SIRST datasets demon-strate the effectiveness of our method. Ablation s-tudy reveals that pixel-level labels are not necessary for SIRST detection while single-point supervision is strong enough. 2.