Abstract
Video object segmentation (VOS) aims at segmenting a particular object throughout the entire video clip sequence.
The state-of-the-art VOS methods have achieved excellent performance (e.g., 90+%  & ) on existing datasets. How-ever, since the target objects in these existing datasets are usually relatively salient, dominant, and isolated, VOS under complex scenes has rarely been studied. To revisit
VOS and make it more applicable in the real world, we collect a new VOS dataset called coMplex video Object
SEgmentation (MOSE) to study the tracking and segment-ing objects in complex scenarios. MOSE contains 2,149 video clips and 5,200 objects from 36 categories, with 431,725 high-quality object segmentation masks. The most notable feature of MOSE dataset is complex scenes with crowded and occluded objects. The target objects in the videos are commonly occluded by others and disappear in some frames. To analyze the proposed MOSE dataset, we benchmark 18 existing VOS methods under 4 differ-ent settings on the proposed MOSE dataset and conduct comprehensive comparisons. The experiments show that (cid:0) henghui.ding@gmail.com current VOS algorithms cannot well perceive objects in complex scenes. For example, under the semi-supervised
VOS setting, the highest  & by existing state-of-the-art
VOS methods is only 59.4% on MOSE, much lower than their ∼90%  & performance on DAVIS. The results reveal that although excellent performance has been achieved on existing benchmarks, there are unresolved challenges under complex scenes and more efforts are desired to explore these challenges in the future. 1.

Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) [73, 74, 97] aims at segmenting a particular object, e.g., the dominant objects or the objects indicated by users, throughout the entire video sequence.
It is one of the most fundamental and challenging computer vision tasks and has a crucial role in many piratical applications that involve video analysis and understanding, e.g., self-driving vehicle, augmented reality, video editing, etc. There are many different settings for VOS, for example, semi-supervised VOS [4, 71] that gives the first-frame mask of the target object, unsupervised
VOS [14, 33] that automatically finds primary objects, and
interactive VOS [9, 68] that relies on the user’s interactions of the target object. Video object segmentation has been extensively studied in the past using traditional techniques or deep learning methods. Especially, the deep-learning-based methods have greatly improved the performance of video object segmentation and surpassed the traditional techniques by a large margin.
Current state-of-the-art methods have achieved very high performance on two of the most commonly-used
VOS datasets DAVIS [73, 74] and YouTube-VOS [97].
For example, XMem [10] achieves 92.0%  & on
DAVIS 2016 [73], 87.7%  & on DAVIS 2017 [74], and 86.1%  on YouTube-VOS [97]. With such a high performance, it seems that the video object segmentation has been well resolved. However, do we really perceive objects in realistic scenarios? To answer this question, we revisit video object segmentation under realistic and
The target objects in existing more complex scenes. datasets [73, 74, 97] are usually salient and dominant.
In real-world scenarios, isolated and salient objects rarely appear while complex and occluded scenes happen
To evaluate current state-of-the-art VOS frequently. methods under more complex scenarios, we collect 2,149 videos with complex scenes and form a new large-scale challenging video object segmentation benchmark, termed coMplex video Object SEgmentation (MOSE).
Specifically, there are 5,200 objects from 36 categories in
MOSE, with 431,725 high-quality segmentation masks. As shown in Figure 1, the most notable feature of MOSE is complex scenarios, including disappearance-reappearance of objects, small/inconspicuous objects, heavy occlusions, crowded scenarios, etc. For example, the white sedan in the first row of Figure 1 is occluded by the bus, and the heaviest occlusion in 3rd image makes the sedan totally disappear.
In the second row of Figure 1, the target player in the crowd is inconspicuous and disappears in the third frame due to the occlusions of the crowd. When the target player reappears, he turns around and shows a different appearance from the first two frames, which makes him very difficult to be tracked. The heavy occlusion and disappearance of objects under complex scenes bring great challenges to video object segmentation. We wish to promote video object segmentation research in complex environments and make VOS applicable in the real world.
To analyze the proposed MOSE dataset, we retrain and evaluate some existing VOS methods on MOSE. Specifi-cally, we retrain 6 state-of-the-art methods under the semi-supervised setting using mask as the first-frame reference, 2 methods under the semi-supervised setting using bounding box as the first-frame reference, 3 methods under the multi-object zero-shot video object segmentation setting, and 7 methods under interactive setting. The experimental re-sults show that videos of complex scenes make the current state-of-the-art VOS methods less pronounced, especially in terms of tracking objects that disappear for a while due to occlusions. For example, the  & performance of
XMem [10] on DAVIS 2016 is 92.0% but drop to 57.6% on
MOSE, the  & performance of DeAOT [104] on DAVIS 2016 is 92.9% but drop to 59.4% on MOSE, which consis-tently reveal the difficulties brought by complex scenes.
The poor performance on MOSE is due to not only occlusions/crowds/small-scale in static images but also ob-jects’ disappearance-reappearance and flickering across the temporal domain. While the heavy occlusions, crowds, and small objects bring challenges to the segmentation of objects in images, the disappearance-reappearance of objects makes it extremely difficult to track an occluded object, increasing the challenge of association.
In a summary, our main contributions are as follows:
• We build a new video object segmentation bench-mark dataset termed MOSE (coMplex video Object
SEgmentation). MOSE focuses on understanding ob-jects in videos under complex environments.
• We conduct comprehensive comparison and evaluation of state-of-the-art VOS methods on the MOSE dataset under 4 different settings, including mask-initialization semi-supervised, box-initialization semi-supervised, unsupervised, and interactive settings.
• Taking a close look at MOSE, we analyze the chal-lenges and potential directions for future video under-standing research in complex scenes. 2.