Abstract
In this paper, we present the first polarization-guided video glass segmentation propagation solution (PGVS-Net) that can robustly and coherently propagate glass segmen-tation in RGB-P video sequences. By leveraging spatio-temporal polarization and color information, our method combines multi-view polarization cues and thus can alle-viate the view dependence of single-input intensity vari-ations on glass objects. We demonstrate that our model can outperform glass segmentation on RGB-only video se-quences as well as produce more robust segmentation than per-frame RGB-P single-image segmentation methods. To train and validate PGVS-Net, we introduce a novel RGB-P
Glass Video dataset (PGV-117) containing 117 video se-quences of scenes captured with different types of camera paths, lighting conditions, dynamics, and glass types. 1.

Introduction
Transparent objects, such as glass, are common in man-made environments. Despite their prevalence, such ob-jects pose numerous challenges for industrial and academic
*Corresponding authors. vision processing algorithms due to their view-dependent appearance, statistical similarity to the background envi-ronment, and lack of texture. These challenges are par-ticularly acute for segmentation tasks that underpin au-tonomous driving, robotics, and aerial drone navigation.
Traditional learning-based solutions [8, 30, 50, 51] that rely on RGB textures for feature extraction often fail to ade-quately model the illumination and view-dependent glass features. Consequently, recent advances have explored richer modalities such as light fields [44] and polariza-tion [14, 18, 21, 29, 46, 49] for more robust segmentation of glass objects. Polarization has proven to be a strong cue for glass segmentation in still images [14, 29]. The availability of commercial off-the-shelf RGB-P cameras (e.g., Flir and
Lucid), makes this last category an attractive modality for glass segmentation.
Polarization of reflected light depends on various fac-tors such as surface normals, material types, and illumina-tion and view directions [2]. Due to the polarimetric near-specular behavior, glass materials are particularly challeng-ing; small changes in object orientation and/or view/light direction can induce a rapid change in polarization state.
For example, consider the glass areas ‘1’ in Figure 2 that show a glass door in various stages of being closed. In this example, the RGB textures remain almost unchanged, but 1
video sequences, especially when object orientation and/or viewpoint changes.
In this paper, we introduce a Polarization Video Glass
Segmentation network (PGVS-Net) to robustly and coher-ently propagate an initial glass segmentation mask over an
RGB-P video sequence. PGVS-Net perceives multi-view polarimetric features from long-range memory and short-range integration. A variation of the Spatio-Temporal Mem-ory network (STM) [33] is introduced to leverage spec-tral polarization cues for constructing long-range view de-pendency. A well-designed Polarization-Guide Integration module (PGI) is responsible for the frame identity and his-torical polarization matching. Furthermore, a novel Polar-ization Temporal Forward module (PTF) integrates previ-ous polarization cues to promote short-range spectral con-sistency during the decoder process. We also leverage cross-modal and cross-temporal attention (CMTA) to in-tegrate multimodal features and temporal representations from different frames. To train and test PGVS-Net, we capture and annotate a large-scale video glass segmentation dataset, PGV-117, which includes 21,485 annotated RGB-P frames and masks. We demonstrate, using this newly created dataset, that our PGVS-Net outperforms competing single-frame RGB-P glass segmentation methods as well as RGB-based video segmentation methods both quantita-tively and qualitatively.
In summary, our contributions are:
• A novel Polarization Video Glass Segmentation net-work (PGVS-Net) to robustly provide glass segmenta-tion propagation in RGB-P video sequences;
• A series of polarimetric consistency and integration modules to enhance spatio-temporal correlation of spectral polarization cues;
• A large-scale video glass segmentation dataset, PGV-117, containing 21,485 frames with spectral polariza-tion cues and densely-annotated masks. 2.