Abstract
Casually captured Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) suf-fer from artifacts such as floaters or flawed geometry when rendered outside the input camera trajectory. Existing eval-uation protocols often do not capture these effects, since they usually only assess image quality at every 8th frame of the training capture. To aid in the development and eval-uation of new methods in novel-view synthesis, we propose a new dataset and evaluation procedure, where two camera trajectories are recorded of the scene: one used for train-ing, and the other for evaluation. In this more challenging in-the-wild setting, we find that existing hand-crafted regu-larizers do not remove floaters nor improve scene geometry.
Thus, we propose a 3D diffusion-based method that lever-ages local 3D priors and a novel density-based score dis-tillation sampling loss to discourage artifacts during NeRF optimization. We show that this data-driven prior removes floaters and improves scene geometry for casual captures. 1.

Introduction
Casual captures of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [20] are usually of lower quality than most captures shown in
NeRF papers. When a typical user (e.g., a hobbyist) cap-tures a NeRFs, the ultimate objective is often to render a fly-through path from a considerably different set of view-points than the originally captured images. This large view-point change between training and rendering views usu-ally reveals floater artifacts and bad geometry, as shown in Fig. 1a. One way to resolve these artifacts is to teach or otherwise encourage users to more extensively capture a scene, as is commonly done in apps such as Polycam1 and Luma2, which will direct users to make three circles at three different elevations looking inward at the object of in-terest. However, these capture processes can be tedious, and
*Denotes equal contribution 1https://poly.cam/ 2https://lumalabs.ai/
furthermore, users may not always follow complex capture instructions well enough to get an artifact-free capture.
Another way to clean NeRF artifacts is to develop algo-rithms that allow for better out-of-distribution NeRF ren-derings. Prior work has explored ways of mitigating arti-facts by using camera pose optimization [38, 13] to handle noisy camera poses, per-image appearance embeddings to handle changes in exposure [15], or robust loss functions to handle transient occluders [32]. However, while these tech-niques and others show improvements on standard bench-marks, most benchmarks focus on evaluating image quality at held-out frames from the training sequence, which is not usually representative of visual quality at novel viewpoints.
Fig. 1c shows how the Nerfacto method starts to degrade as the novel-view becomes more extreme.
In this paper, we propose both (1) a novel method for cleaning up casually captured NeRFs and (2) a new eval-uation procedure for measuring the quality of a NeRF that better reflects rendered image quality at novel viewpoints.
Our proposed evaluation protocol is to capture two videos: one for training a NeRF, and a second for novel-view evalu-ation (Fig. 1b). Using the images from the second capture as ground-truth (as well as depth and normals extracted from a reconstruction on all frames), we can compute a set of met-rics on visible regions where we expect the scene to have been reasonably captured in the training sequence. Follow-ing this evaluation protocol, we capture a new dataset with 12 scenes, each with two camera sequences for training and evaluation.
We also propose Nerfbusters, a method aimed at im-proving geometry for everyday NeRF captures by improv-ing surface coherence, cleaning up floaters, and removing cloudy artifacts. Our method learns a local 3D geometric prior with a diffusion network trained on synthetic 3D data and uses this prior to encourage plausible geometry during
NeRF optimization. Compared to global 3D priors, local geometry is simpler, category-agnostic, and more repeat-able, making it suitable for arbitrary scenes and smaller-scale networks (a 28 Mb U-Net effectively models the dis-tribution of all plausible surface patches). Given this data-driven, local 3D prior, we use a novel unconditional Den-sity Score Distillation Sampling (DSDS) loss to regularize the NeRF. We find that this technique removes floaters and makes the scene geometry crisper. To the best of our knowl-edge, we are the first to demonstrate that a learned local 3D prior can improve NeRFs. Empirically, we demonstrate that
Nerfbusters achieves state-of-the-art performance for casual captures compared to other geometry regularizers.
We implement our evaluation procedure and Nerfbusters method in the open-source Nerfstudio repository [35]. The code and data can be found at https://ethanweber. me/nerfbusters.
Figure 2: Evaluation protocols. Current evaluation of NeRFs (e.g., MipNeRF 360) measures render quality at every 8th frame of the captured (training) trajectory, thus only testing the model’s ability to render views with small viewpoint changes. In contrast, we propose a new evaluation protocol, where two sequences are captured of the same scene: one for training and one for evalua-tion. Please see the supplementary material for plots showing the training and evaluation sequences for various NeRF datasets, in-cluding our proposed Nerfbuster Dataset. 2.