Abstract 1.

Introduction
Optimizing and rendering Neural Radiance Fields is computationally expensive due to the vast number of samples required by volume rendering. Recent works have included alternative sampling approaches to help accelerate their methods, however, they are often not the focus of the work.
In this paper, we investigate and compare multiple sampling approaches and demonstrate that improved sampling is generally applicable across NeRF variants under an unified concept of transmittance estimator.
To facilitate future experiments, we develop NerfAcc, a
Python toolbox that provides flexible APIs for incorporating advanced sampling methods into NeRF related methods. We demonstrate its flexibility by showing that it can reduce the training time of several recent NeRF methods by 1.5× to 20× with minimal modifications to the existing codebase.
Additionally, highly customized NeRFs, such as Instant-NGP, can be implemented in native PyTorch using NerfAcc. Our code are open-sourced at https://www.nerfacc.com.
Neural volume rendering has revolutionized the in-verse rendering problem, with the Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [16] being a key innovation. The continuous radi-ance field representation allows for rendering novel views of a scene from any camera position. However, the optimiza-tion of a NeRF can be computationally expensive due to the neural representation of radiance field and the large number of samples required by volume rendering. These challenges have limited practical applications of NeRF-based optimiza-tion and rendering.
Several recent works have successfully reduced the com-putational cost of neural volume rendering by proposing more efficient radiance field representations [17, 35, 36, 4, 24, 7]. While there are differences in the specific radiance field representations and their applications, most of these methods share a similar volume rendering pipeline which involves creating samples along the ray and accumulating them through alpha-composition.
However, compared to the considerable efforts focused on developing efficient radiance field representations, there has
been limited attention devoted to reducing the computational cost of neural volume rendering through efficient sampling.
While a few recent works have included alternative sampling approaches to accelerate their methods [17, 35, 24, 2], these methods are often not the main focus of the paper. Moreover, implementing advanced sampling approaches typically requires non-trivial efforts. For example, Instant-NGP [17] and Plenoxels [35] both employ highly customized CUDA implementations to achieve spatial skipping during ray marching, which are tightly coupled with their respective radiance field implementations. Consequently, it can be challenging for researchers to benefit from these advanced sampling approaches in their own research.
In this paper, we investigate and compare several ad-vanced sampling approaches from the literature and pro-vide mathematical proofs demonstrating that they can all be viewed in a unified way of creating an estimation of trans-mittance for importance sampling. Our analysis shows that by understanding the spectrum of sampling through transmit-tance estimator, novel sampling strategies can be explored.
Based on this, we decouple the sampling procedure from the neural volumetric rendering pipeline and demonstrate that improved sampling is generally applicable across dif-ferent variants of NeRF. Furthermore, to facilitate future experiments, we propose NerfAcc, a plug-and-play toolbox that provides a flexible Python API for integrating advanced sampling approaches into NeRF-related methods, ready for researchers to incorporate into their own codebases. We demonstrate that with less than 100 lines of code change us-ing NerfAcc, various NeRF methods [16, 4, 5, 7, 14, 21, 17] can enjoy 1.5× to 20× training speedup with better perfor-mance. Notably, using the NerfAcc library, one can train an
Instant-NGP [17] model with pure Python code in the same amount of time, and achieve slightly better performance (+0.2dB) than the official pure CUDA implementation.
Our paper presents a unique contribution to the commu-nity. Unlike other papers that introduce novel algorithms, our work sheds light on the intricacies of various sampling approaches, which are often overlooked despite their significance. As far as we know, this work is the first paper that dives deep into this crucial aspect in the context of neural radiance field, and offer a novel, unified concept that allows researchers to view existing sampling algorithms in a fresh perspective. In addition, we provide a toolbox that facilitates research and development in this area. We believe translation of mathematical ideas into efficient, easy-to-modify implementation is fundamental to the research development. Overall, we hope that our proposed concept, along with the toolbox, can inspire new research ideas and accelerate progress in this field. 2.