Abstract
We present a novel method called NeTO, for captur-ing the 3D geometry of solid transparent objects from 2D images via volume rendering. Reconstructing transpar-ent objects is a very challenging task, which is ill-suited for general-purpose reconstruction techniques due to the specular light transport phenomena. Although existing refraction-tracing-based methods, designed especially for this task, achieve impressive results, they still suffer from unstable optimization and loss of fine details since the ex-plicit surface representation they adopted is difficult to be optimized, and the self-occlusion problem is ignored for
In this paper, we propose to leverage refraction-tracing. implicit Signed Distance Function (SDF) as surface rep-resentation and optimize the SDF field via volume render-ing with a self-occlusion aware refractive ray tracing. The implicit representation enables our method to be capable of reconstructing high-quality reconstruction even with a limited set of views, and the self-occlusion aware strat-egy makes it possible for our method to accurately recon-struct the self-occluded regions. Experiments show that our method achieves faithful reconstruction results and outper-forms prior works by a large margin. Visit our project page at https://www.xxlong.site/NeTO/.
Ground Truth
Ours
Our synthesized view
DRT [23]
Figure 1:
Illustration of a sparse setting using only one fourth of the camera images, i.e., {Ii}i=1,5,9..., to recover the model Dog in the DRT dataset. Compared with DRT, our method produces more accurate renderings, which in-dicates the high quality of our reconstruction. The synthe-sized view is obtained via Blender. 1.

Introduction
Reconstructing 3D models of real-world objects has been one of the longstanding problems.
It has been re-searched for decades in computer vision and graphics, which boosts the development of many applications, such as augmented reality, automatic driving, and robots. However, existing general-purpose multi-view reconstruction meth-ods [15, 16, 17, 39, 47, 50] are only suitable for opaque
*Equal contributions.
†Corresponding author. objects whose surfaces are approximately Lambertian, and few of them can tackle transparent objects. The light paths passing through transparent objects are extremely complex and involve refractions and reflections.
Recently, some state-of-the-art methods have been pro-posed to reconstruct solid transparent objects in a non-intrusive manner, capturing refraction-tracing consistency with specially designed hardware systems, and have pro-duced impressive results. This is achieved by optimizing correspondences between camera rays and locations on the background monitor [23] or enforcing consistency between
Ground Truth
Ours
DRT [23]
Ground Truth
Ours
DRT [23]
Figure 2: The comparisons of novel view synthesis with sparsity = 8 (9 views). After obtaining the reconstruction models via our method and DRT, we render two views of the models via Blender. Compared with DRT, our method produces more accurate renderings (see the red and yellow boxes), which indicates the high quality of our reconstruction. camera rays and refracted rays with a rotating background monitor [53]. However, those methods either adopt point cloud [53] or mesh [23] as surface representation, and the explicit representations are difficult to be optimized. As a result, the methods usually require a large number of views as input for optimization. Without enough images as input, the methods easily fail to reconstruct faithful geometry due to unstable optimization (see Figure 1).
More importantly, a critical issue still remains ignored, i.e., how to tackle the self-occluded parts of the objects. The widely-used refraction-tracing consistency assumes that a camera ray is only refracted twice (upon entering and upon exiting) on the object surfaces when the ray passes through a transparent object. However, the assumption is not always true when a camera ray passes through the self-occluded parts where the ray will be refracted by surfaces more than twice. As a result, mistakenly enforcing the refraction-tracing consistency on the self-occluded parts will unavoid-ably introduce errors in the optimization of reconstruction, which is a bottleneck to further enhance the reconstructed geometries.
In this work, we propose a novel method, called NeTO, for reconstructing high-quality 3D geometry of solid trans-parent objects.
In contrast to prior works [23], we adopt implicit Signed Distance Function (SDF) as surface rep-resentation and leverage volume rendering [47] to enforce the refraction-tracing consistency. Moreover, we propose a simple but effective strategy to detect the self-occluded parts and avoid mistakenly enforcing constraints on these regions. The key idea is that we leverage the law of re-versibility, that is, If the direction of a light beam is re-versed, despite the number of times the beam is reflected or refracted, it will follow the same path, to identify whether a camera ray is reversible or not upon the assumption that the ray is refracted exactly twice.
To validate our method, we conduct experiments on
DRT [23] dataset and our collected data with full views set-ting and various sparse views settings. The sparse setting selects one view from every n consecutive camera index, i.e., {1, n + 1, 2n + 1, ...}, where n is termed as Sparsity.
The extensive experiments show that our method enables the high-quality reconstruction of transparent objects and outperforms the previous methods. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• A novel neural surface reconstruction system is adopt-ing implicit SDF as a representation for reconstructing transparent objects, thus enabling robust reconstruc-tion optimization.
• A self-occlusion aware refraction-tracing strategy is introduced to accurately enforce the constraint, mak-ing it possible to recover geometries with fine details.
• Experimental results show that our method achieves
SOTA results compared to prior works. 2.