Abstract
Collage is a creative art form that uses diverse mate-rial scraps as a base unit to compose a single image. Al-though pixel-wise generation techniques can reproduce a target image in collage style, it is not a suitable method due to the solid stroke-by-stroke nature of the collage form.
While some previous works for stroke-based rendering pro-duced decent sketches and paintings, collages have received much less attention in research despite their popularity as a style.
In this paper, we propose a method for learning to make collages via reinforcement learning without the need for demonstrations or collage artwork data. We de-sign the collage Markov Decision Process (MDP), which allows the agent to handle various materials and propose a model-based soft actor-critic to mitigate the agent’s train-ing burden derived from the sophisticated dynamics of col-lage. Moreover, we devise additional techniques such as active material selection and complexity-based multi-scale collage to handle target images at any size and enhance the results’ aesthetics by placing relatively more scraps in ar-eas of high complexity. Experimental results show that the
*Corresponding authors trained agent appropriately selected and pasted materials to regenerate the target image into a collage and obtained a higher evaluation score on content and style than pixel-wise generation methods. Code is available at https:
//github.com/northadventure/CollageRL. 1.

Introduction
Collage, derived from the French word coller meaning to glue, is a fundamental art form where disparate scraps of images are assembled and arranged geometrically to create a complete scene. The intriguing and alluring impression of collage was influenced by the art movement of Cubism, particularly the work of Pablo Picasso, and has now be-come a prevalent art style. However, creating high-quality collage artworks in the style of artists such as Derek Gores requires professional-level skills, much like other art forms such as painting. Collage may seem like a simple variation of painting, but it is much more challenging when attempted by artificial agent for several reasons. Unlike predefined brush strokes in paintings, the strokes of a collage depend on selecting materials from a diverse range of candidates, which involves uncertainty. After the material selection, the complicated manipulation process of cutting and past-ing follows. Moreover, detailed representations are strictly limited when the content of material pieces is unmodifiable.
Even for a human, a large amount of experience is required to handle these difficulties.
Fortunately, recent advances in AI-based art creation have made art more accessible to ordinary people. Pixel-based generation approaches evolved from Deep Convo-lutional Neural Networks (DCNNs) [48, 14], Variational
Auto-Encoders (VAEs) [23], and Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) [9] have fostered the creation of novel artworks [39, 6] and transferred images into various styles
[8, 5, 20, 57, 54, 16, 34, 25] under Neural Style Transfer (NST) [21]. However, pixel-based approaches directly dis-cover the final look in the pixel space; the result can be seen as unnatural and cannot obtain a natural creation sequence.
Since most art formulations enjoy stroke-by-stroke, a more natural and aesthetic collage can be obtained if a ma-chine learns to create collages in a stroke-by-stroke fash-ion. There have been some previous learning approaches in stroke-based rendering (SBR) [15] to imitate stroke-by-stroke image generation, such as supervised learning
[11, 33, 29, 1], reinforcement learning (RL) [7, 17], and optimization [59, 24, 36]. Although they produced attrac-tive sketches and paintings, they are partly incompatible with the concept of collages. For supervised learning, pub-lic collage process data is hardly available, and generating sufficient data is almost infeasible. Existing RL and opti-mization methods assuming the fixed material structure for every stroke do not align well with collages incorporating dynamic materials. Overall, collage has received compara-tively less attention in the artistic creation domain.
In this paper, we introduce a novel RL-based method for learning how to generate a collage artwork using a given tar-get image and materials. RL offers experience-based learn-ing to handle various possible situations in the collage pro-cedure without data cost, leading to the development of dis-tinct creation styles. To effectively train the agent, we build a novel environment, the collage Markov Decision Process (MDP), which allows the agent to explore a wide range of material spaces to learn appropriate material selection and manipulation skills. We propose the model-based Soft
Actor-Critic (MB-SAC) to mitigate the burden of predicting complicated dynamics in collage. At each training step, the agent observes the canvas, the given material, and the target image to decide on cutout shapes for the material and the pasting locations on the canvas. The reward increases as the canvas becomes more similar to the target image, encourag-ing the agent to learn more elaborate behaviors to reproduce the original content in a collage form. Moreover, we extend the trained collage agent to make a multi-scale collage for any size of the target images, considering the image com-plexity for more aesthetic appeal.
Our extensive experimental results show that our pro-posed method enables an agent to learn the nature of col-lage autonomously without expensive collage datasets or collage demonstrations. Moreover, the proposed method can handle target images of any size, and the generated col-lage produces sophisticated and aesthetic output. This is because the agent can select appropriate scraps from ma-terials and place more scraps in areas of high complexity.
Furthermore, through quantitative analysis, we have shown that our approach outperforms other competitive methods in terms of image similarity from the target image and seman-tic consistency using CLIP [41]-based measures and user study. These results demonstrate that our method success-fully transfers the target image to collage style while pre-serving its content. 2.