Abstract
We propose a novel neural deformable model (NDM) targeting at the reconstruction and modeling of 3D bi-ventricular shape of the heart from 2D sparse cardiac mag-netic resonance (CMR) imaging data. We model the bi-ventricular shape using blended deformable superquadrics, which are parameterized by a set of geometric parameter functions and are capable of deforming globally and lo-cally. While global geometric parameter functions and de-formations capture gross shape features from visual data, local deformations, parameterized as neural diffeomorphic point flows, can be learned to recover the detailed heart shape. Different from iterative optimization methods used in conventional deformable model formulations, NDMs can be trained to learn such geometric parameter functions, global and local deformations from a shape distribution manifold.
Our NDM can learn to densify a sparse cardiac point cloud with arbitrary scales and generate high-quality triangular meshes automatically.
It also enables the implicit learn-ing of dense correspondences among different heart shape instances for accurate cardiac shape registration. Further-more, the parameters of NDM are intuitive, and can be used by a physician without sophisticated post-processing. Ex-perimental results on a large CMR dataset demonstrate the improved performance of NDM over conventional methods. 1.

Introduction
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) is the gold standard for non-invasive evaluation of global cardiac func-tion, i.e., blood pumping of the left ventricle (LV). Due to the relatively slow imaging speed of MR, current clinical
CMR scan protocols are 2D-based. To recover the 3D ge-ometry of the LV and right ventricle (RV), we usually scan a stack of short axis (SAX) and several long axis (LAX) im-ages. As shown in Fig. 1 (a-f), SAX images cover the range from the base to the apex of the heart and LAX images in-clude 2-, 3-, 4-chamber views. Although in-plane resolution of the image is high enough to capture 2D cardiac anatom-ical details, the through-plane resolution is much lower, in order to reduce imaging time. Therefore, the SAX and LAX images together can only produce a sparse 3D point cloud of the heart, as shown in Fig. 1 (g). The dense and accurate 3D geometry reconstruction, as shown in Fig. 1 (h), is thus needed for not only the downstream image analysis tasks, such as the estimation of LV mass and volume[40], and 3D cardiac wall strain fields [26, 17, 19], but also other clinical applications, such as image-guided interventions [32] and biomechanics finite element-based simulations [39, 37, 16]. 3D cardiac geometry reconstruction has a long his-tory [24, 26, 40, 23, 38, 8, 31, 20]. Most of the previ-ous methods reconstruct the 3D shape from a sparse point cloud generated from segmentation results on CMR images.
Those segmentations delineate the myocardium wall, blood pool of the LV and RV, as shown by the green points in
Fig. 1. As one of the conventional methods, template mesh adaptation first constructs a template mesh that describes the mean shape of the target and then registers this template with the sparse point cloud [38]. The resulting meshes are usually not accurate for data that have large shape variation from the mean shape, which leads to a generalization prob-lem of this kind of approach.
We are inspired by the success of conventional de-formable models (CDMs) for their efficiency in shape re-construction and ability to provide intuitive and explainable shape parameters [26, 28, 23]. CDMs can efficiently de-scribe the target shape using a set of global and local de-formation parameters. However, to fit a shape primitive to a target shape, conventional methods use iterative opti-mization and fit the primitive to the given data. We pro-pose a neural deformable model (NDM), which is com-posed of global deformations using parameter functions and local deformations using neural diffeomorphic flows.
It can be trained to learn the global and local deformation parameters, conditioning on the sparse given data, from a shape distribution manifold. As shown in Fig. 1 (h), NDM can accurately reconstruct the bi-ventricle shape from the
Figure 1. Cardiac MR standard scan views and bi-ventricular shape reconstruction. (a-c) Short axis (SAX) views at the basal/middle/apex region of the left ventricle (LV). (d-f) Long axis (LAX) 2/3/4 chamber (CH) views. Green points show the endo-/epi-cardial border of
LV and the border of right ventricle (RV). (g) Sparse cardiac point cloud with 10 SAX and 3 LAX slices’ data. (h) Bi-ventricular mesh reconstructed from (g) by our neural deformable model, in which the LV endo-cardial, epi-cardial and RV surfaces are shown in red, blue and yellow, respectively. sparse point cloud, as shown in Fig. 1 (g). NDM also enables implicit learning of dense correspondences among shape instances, which facilitates accurate shape registra-tion. Lastly, NDM estimates shape parameters of the heart directly, which can be used by clinicians without sophisti-cated post-processing.
Our key contributions in this work can be summarized as follows: (1) We formulate a new shape modeling frame-work which can capture global shape information and re-cover complex shape details accurately; (2) We design a novel neural deformable model and propose an efficient coarse-to-fine learning paradigm to learn the global and lo-cal deformation parameters from a shape distribution man-ifold; (3) We show how such a shape modeling framework can be trained to perform clinically meaningful 3D heart shape reconstruction, registration and interpretation. Fur-thermore, our method has the potentials to inspire shape re-construction and registration tasks in other domains. 2.