Abstract
We present a novel type of neural fields that uses gen-eral radial bases for signal representation. State-of-the-art neural fields typically rely on grid-based representations for storing local neural features and N-dimensional linear ker-nels for interpolating features at continuous query points.
The spatial positions of their neural features are fixed on grid nodes and cannot well adapt to target signals. Our method instead builds upon general radial bases with flex-ible kernel position and shape, which have higher spatial adaptivity and can more closely fit target signals. To further improve the channel-wise capacity of radial basis functions, we propose to compose them with multi-frequency sinusoid functions. This technique extends a radial basis to multiple
Fourier radial bases of different frequency bands without requiring extra parameters, facilitating the representation of details. Moreover, by marrying adaptive radial bases with grid-based ones, our hybrid combination inherits both adaptivity and interpolation smoothness. We carefully de-signed weighting schemes to let radial bases adapt to dif-ferent types of signals effectively. Our experiments on 2D image and 3D signed distance field representation demon-strate the higher accuracy and compactness of our method than prior arts. When applied to neural radiance field re-construction, our method achieves state-of-the-art render-ing quality, with small model size and comparable training speed. 1.

Introduction
Neural fields (also termed implicit neural representation) have gained much popularity in recent years due to their ef-fectiveness in representing 2D images, 3D shapes, radiance fields, etc. [50, 44, 15, 70, 62, 47, 48]. Compared to tra-† Corresponding author.
Figure 1. NeuRBF provides an accurate and compact neural fields representation for 2D images, 3D SDF, and neural radiance fields. ditional discrete signal representations, neural fields utilize neural networks to establish a mapping from continuous in-put coordinates to the corresponding output value. Owing to their concise and efficient formulation, neural fields have been applied to various areas ranging from signal compres-sion [66, 22, 12, 86], 3D reconstruction [49, 83, 79], neu-ral rendering [47, 48, 9, 39, 63, 25, 64, 14], medical imag-ing [24, 81, 75], acoustic synthesis [11] and climate predic-tion [31].
Early neural fields [50, 44, 15, 47] use neural fea-tures that are globally shared in the input domain. De-spite the compactness of the models, they have difficulty in representing high-frequency details due to the inductive bias [5, 70] of MLPs. To tackle this problem, local neu-ral fields have been proposed and widely adopted [7, 32, 51, 41, 26, 67, 48, 9], where each local region in the in-put domain is assigned with different neural features. A common characteristic in this line of work is to use ex-plicit grid-like structures to spatially organize neural fea-tures and apply N-dimensional linear interpolation to ag-gregate local neural features. However, grid-like structures are not adaptive to the target signals and cannot fully exploit the non-uniformity and sparsity in various tasks, leading to
potentially sub-optimal accuracy and compactness. While multi-resolution techniques [69, 16, 58, 84, 28] have been explored, it can still be expensive to achieve fine granularity with excessive resolution levels. Some works [47, 70, 62] use frequency encoding to address the low-frequency induc-tive bias. However, this technique is only applied on either input coordinates or deep features.
In this work, we aim to increase the representation ac-curacy and compactness of neural fields by equipping the interpolation of basis functions with both spatial adaptiv-ity and frequency extension. We observe that the grid-based linear interpolation, which is the fundamental build-ing block in state-of-the-art local neural fields, is a spe-cial case of radial basis function (RBF). While grid-based structures typically grow quadratically or cubically, general
RBFs can require fewer parameters (sometimes even con-stant number) to represent patterns such as lines and ellip-soids. Based upon this observation, we propose NeuRBF, which comprises of a combination of adaptive RBFs and grid-based RBFs. The former uses general anisotropic ker-nel function with high adaptivity while the latter uses N-dimensional linear kernel function to provide interpolation smoothness.
To further enhance the representation capability of
RBFs, we propose to extend them channel-wise and com-pose them with multi-frequency sinusoid function. This allows each RBF to encode a wider range of frequencies without requiring extra parameters. This multi-frequency encoding technique is also applicable to the features in the
MLP, which further improves accuracy and compactness.
To effectively adapt radial bases to target signals, we adopt the weighted variant of K-Means to initialize their kernel parameters, and design a weighting scheme for each of the three tasks (see Fig. 1): 2D image fitting, 3D signed distance field (SDF) reconstruction, and neural radiance field (NeRF) reconstruction. For NeRF, since it involves in-direct supervision, traditional K-Means cannot be directly applied. To address this, we further propose a distillation-based approach.
In summary, our work has the following contributions:
• We present a general framework for neural fields based on radial basis functions and propose a hybrid combi-nation of adaptive RBFs and grid-based RBFs.
• We extend radial bases with multi-frequency sinu-soidal composition, which substantially enhances their representation ability.
• To effectively adapt RBFs to different target signals, we devise tailored weighting schemes for K-Means and a distillation-based approach.
• Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art accuracy and compactness on 2D image fitting, 3D signed distance field reconstruc-tion, and neural radiance field reconstruction. 2.