Abstract
Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging is conducted to in-fer invisible scenes from indirect light on visible objects.
The neural transient field (NeTF) was proposed for repre-senting scenes as neural radiance fields in NLOS scenes.
We propose NLOS neural implicit surface (NLOS-NeuS), which extends the NeTF to neural implicit surfaces with a signed distance function (SDF) for reconstructing three-dimensional surfaces in NLOS scenes. We introduce two constraints as loss functions for correctly learning an SDF to avoid non-zero level-set surfaces. We also introduce a lower bound constraint of an SDF based on the geom-etry of the first-returning photons. The experimental re-sults indicate that these constraints are essential for learn-ing a correct SDF in NLOS scenes. Compared with pre-vious methods with discretized representation, NLOS-NeuS with the neural continuous representation enables us to re-construct smooth surfaces while preserving fine details in
NLOS scenes. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study on neural implicit surfaces with volume rendering in NLOS scenes. Project page: https://yfujimura. github.io/nlos-neus/ 1.

Introduction
Many computer-vision applications are being integrated into society. However, most are intended for visible scenes from cameras. Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging [16, 38] is used to infer invisible scenes occluded from the cam-eras. Figure 1(a) shows a typical confocal NLOS setup
[31], in which an ultra-fast light source and time-resolved detector are collocated and the detector can only see a dif-fuse wall. Pulsed light from the light source is emitted into the visible wall, and reflected light on the wall reaches an NLOS scene. Reflected light in the NLOS scene then bounces back to the detector via the relay wall. A time-resolved detectors for such NLOS imaging is a single pho-ton avalanche diode (SPAD) [5] (top in Fig 1(b)). A SPAD is capable of time-correlated single photon counting with
Figure 1. (a) Confocal NLOS setup, (b) SPAD system and mea-sured transients, (c) NLOS surface reconstruction with DLCT
[45] and (d) with our NLOS-NeuS. Neural implicit surface repre-sentation can enhance quality of reconstructed surfaces in NLOS scenes. pico-second resolution [40]. Measured data with such a time-resolved detector are called transients, in which the number of counted photons or intensity is recorded at each arrival time (bottom in Fig. 1(b)). One approach for NLOS imaging is to use the transients on the relay wall as input.
We aim to reconstruct three-dimensional (3D) surfaces in
NLOS scenes from the transients, similar to previous stud-ies [13, 34, 36, 37, 42, 45].
We extend the neural transient field (NeTF) [35] for neu-ral implicit surface representation in NLOS scenes. The neural radiance field (NeRF) [26] is a powerful paradigm for scene representation, in which density and view-dependent color at each scene position are continuously pa-rameterized with a multi-layer perceptron (MLP), which is optimized by reconstructing input multi-view images with volume rendering. The NeTF is the extended version of the
NeRF for transient measurement in an NLOS setup. How-ever, the NeTF (and also the NeRF) does not support ge-ometric representation, which is necessary for accurate 3D reconstruction. We incorporate the framework of a neural implicit surface with volume rendering such as NeuS [39] and VolSDF [43] into the NeTF for NLOS neural implicit surface reconstruction, i.e., NLOS-NeuS.
We argue that a simple extension of the NeTF to neu-ral implicit surface representation with a signed distance function (SDF) causes a non-zero level-set surface due to an under-constrained NLOS setup. We introduce effective training losses to avoid a non-zero level-set surface. Fig-ure 1(d) shows an example of the surface reconstruction of an occluded object with NLOS-NeuS. Compared with the results of the state-of-the art NLOS surface-reconstruction method [45] (Fig. 1(c)), the fine details of the target object can be reconstructed because of the nature of its continuous representation. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study on a neural implicit surface with volume rendering in
NLOS scenes. 2.