Abstract
Semi-supervised 3D object detection from point cloud aims to train a detector with a small number of labeled data and a large number of unlabeled data. The core of exist-ing methods lies in how to select high-quality pseudo-labels using the designed quality evaluation criterion. However, these methods treat each pseudo bounding box as a whole and assign equal importance to each side during training, which is detrimental to model performance due to many sides having poor localization quality. Besides, existing methods filter out a large number of low-quality pseudo-labels, which also contain some correct regression val-ues that can help with model training. To address the above issues, we propose a side-aware framework for semi-supervised 3D object detection consisting of three key de-signs: a 3D bounding box parameterization method, an un-certainty estimation module, and a pseudo-label selection strategy. These modules work together to explicitly esti-mate the localization quality of each side and assign dif-ferent levels of importance during the training phase. Ex-tensive experiment results demonstrate that the proposed method can consistently outperform baseline models un-der different scenes and evaluation criteria. Moreover, our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on three datasets with different labeled ratios.
Figure 1. The motivation of this paper. (a): Red represents pseudo-labels and green represents ground-truth. Pseudo-labels with high IoU may be incorrect on some sides, while pseudo-labels with low IoU may be correct on some sides. Global scores like
IoU are insufficient for pseudo-label selection. (b): The side qual-ity statistics of different methods for 300 scenes. The green bars indicate the number of sides with error less than 0.1, while the red bars indicate the number of sides with error greater than 0.1.
The recall indicates the proportion of ground-truth that are covered by the pseudo-labels. The proposed method can effectively select sides with high quality for model training. 1.

Introduction
The goal of 3D object detection is to estimate oriented 3D boundary boxes as well as category labels of objects from a point cloud. Due to its significant potential applica-tions in autonomous driving [5, 6, 1], many fully supervised 3D object detection methods have been proposed over the past few decades [22, 21], leading to remarkable progress in this area. However, these methods rely heavily on a large amount of carefully annotated 3D scene data, which is ex-pensive and time-consuming to collect.
*Corresponding Author
To reduce the high annotation cost associated with fully supervised 3D object detection methods, semi-supervised methods [28, 37, 31, 30, 35] that use a combination of few labeled data and a large amount of unlabeled data for model training have gained increasing attention. Existing semi-supervised methods can be broadly divided into two cate-gories: consistency-based methods [37] and pseudo-label based methods [31, 30, 35]. For consistency-based meth-ods, the core idea is to encourage the prediction on data with different augmentations to be consistent. For exam-ple, SESS [37] adopts the mean-teacher framework and utilizes three consistency losses between the student and 1
teacher model to enforce the consensus of object locations, semantic categories and sizes. However, the consistency constraint may lead to suboptimal results due to significant noise in model predictions. On the other hand, pseudo-label based methods aim to select high-quality pseudo-labels from model predictions of unlabeled data and then use them in combination with labeled data for model train-ing. For example, HPCA [31] introduces the idea of adap-tive class confidence selection to select pseudo-labels with confidence above the threshold, while 3DIoUMatch [30] equips the detector with 3D Intersection over Union (IoU) estimation module to estimate the global localization qual-ity and proposes lower-half suppression strategy for pseudo-label filtering.
Despite the success of pseudo-label based methods, they all use global metric scores (IoU, classification confidence, and voting score, et al.) to select pseudo-labels. However, pseudo-labels with high global metric scores may not cover each side of the object well, while pseudo-labels with low global metric scores may provide correct predictions for some object sides. As shown in Figure 1 (a), the IoU of pseudo-label A is high, but significant errors exist on the left and back sides. Using these noisy predictions to super-vise the student model is harmful. On the contrary, although the IoU of pseudo-label B is relatively low, the predictions of four sides (front, left, top and down sides) are accurate, which is valuable for model training but discarded in exist-ing methods.
To deal with the above problem, an intuitive way is to estimate the localization quality of each side and treat dif-ferent sides with different importance for model training.
To achieve this, two key issues need to be considered: 1)
How to estimate the localization quality of each side? Ex-isting methods [31, 30, 35] treat the boundary box predic-tion as a whole and usually use global metrics to supervised model training, which cannot reflect the localization qual-ity of each side. 2) how to select pseudo-labels based on the side localization quality for model training? An effec-tive pseudo-label selection strategy should suppress the in-terference of sides with low quality while retaining sides with high quality to supervise model training.
Motivated by the above discussion, we propose a novel side-aware method for semi-supervised 3D object detection, which consists of a new 3D boundary box parameterization strategy, a quality estimation strategy, and a pseudo-label filtering strategy. In the 3D boundary box parameterization strategy, we decouple the localization task by dividing the object boundary box into six independent sides and predict the position of each side as a probability distribution over discrete values. The distribution can determine the loca-tion of each side and can be used in subsequent modules for localization quality estimation.
In the quality estima-tion strategy, we design a side-aware uncertainty estimation
It takes the module to evaluate the quality of each side. predicted distribution properties and side-aware geometric features as input, and learns to assess the quality of each side under the guidance of an uncertainty regression loss.
As shown in Figure 1(a), the proposed strategy can assign higher uncertainty to sides with lower localization quality.
In the pseudo-label filtering strategy, we use class-specific dynamic thresholds and a soft weight assignment strategy to assign higher importance to sides with higher quality, which can suppress the interference of low-quality sides while fully utilizing sides with higher quality in the pseudo-labels. As shown in Figure 1 (b), 3DIoUMatch [30] fil-ters out low-quality pseudo-labels by setting a high thresh-old, which discards a large number of correct pseudo-labels.
However, a low threshold can improve the recall ratio, and it also introduces many incorrect pseudo-labels. Our method can suppress the interference of incorrect sides and retain as many correct pseudo-labels as possible for model training.
In summary, the contributions of this paper are as fol-lows: (1) We introduce a novel side-aware model for semi-supervised 3D object detection, which includes a 3D bound-ing box parameterization method, an uncertainty estimation module, and a pseudo-label selection strategy. The pro-posed method allows for explicit estimation of the localiza-tion quality of each side and can assign different levels of importance to each side during the training phase. (2) Ex-tensive experimental results show that the proposed method can consistently improve the performance of baseline detec-tors under different scenes and evaluation criteria, verify-ing the effectiveness of our model. Moreover, the proposed method can achieve new state-of-the-art performance on 3 datasets, including 2 indoor datasets and 1 outdoor dataset. 2.