Abstract 1.

Introduction
Multi-agent cooperative perception is an increasingly popular topic in the field of autonomous driving, where roadside LiDARs play an essential role. However, how to optimize the placement of roadside LiDARs is a crucial but often overlooked problem. This paper proposes an ap-proach to optimize the placement of roadside LiDARs by se-lecting optimized positions within the scene for better per-ception performance. To efficiently obtain the best combi-nation of locations, a greedy algorithm based on perceptual gain is proposed, which selects the location that can maxi-mize the perceptual gain sequentially. We define perceptual gain as the increased perceptual capability when a new Li-DAR is placed. To obtain the perception capability, we pro-pose a perception predictor that learns to evaluate LiDAR placement using only a single point cloud frame. A dataset named Roadside-Opt is created using the CARLA simula-tor to facilitate research on the roadside LiDAR placement problem. Extensive experiments are conducted to demon-strate the effectiveness of our proposed method.
*Equal corresponding author
Accurate perception of the driving environment is crit-ical for autonomous driving, and recent advancements in deep learning have significantly improved the robustness of single-vehicle perception algorithms in tasks such as object detection [19, 29, 10, 1, 26, 34, 39]. Compared to single-vehicle perception, utilizing both vehicle and infrastructure sensors for collaborative perception brings significant ad-vantages, such as a global perspective beyond the current horizon and coverage of blind spots. Current progress in multi-agent communication has enabled such collaboration by sharing the visual data with other agents [36, 2, 25, 33].
Among the collaboration, the LiDAR sensors play a criti-cal role as they can provide reliable geometry information and be directly transferred to real-world coordinate systems from any agent’s perspective[6]. the
To optimize the LiDAR perception performance, placement of LiDAR sensors is critical [14]. However, cur-rent research mainly focuses on the placement of LiDAR sensors on vehicles and neglects the placement problem for roadside LiDAR [14, 23]. As Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) applications continue to develop, it becomes increasingly important to determine the optimal placement for roadside
LiDARs to maximize their benefits. Unlike vehicle LiDAR, the placement of roadside LiDAR has greater flexibility. As depicted in Figure 1, the roadside LiDAR placement opti-mization problem aims to maximize perception ability for a scene, usually an intersection with dense traffic flow, by selecting M optimal locations from N potential locations for placing roadside LiDARs.
Existing literature on LiDAR placement such as [14, 23] propose surrogate metrics such as S-MIG and Perception
Entropy to evaluate LiDAR placement, while [4] analyzes the correlation between perception performance and LiDAR point cloud density and uniformity. However, these meth-ods cannot be directly applied to roadside LiDAR optimiza-tion since they only evaluate LiDAR placement rather than directly optimizing sensor position. Additionally, these sur-rogate metrics are based on probabilistic occupancy and may not be directly related to Average Precision (AP) ob-tained by multi-agent detection models, which may result in sub-optimal performance when tested with multi-agent 3D detection models.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel method to directly optimize the placement of roadside LiDAR through a perceptual gain based greedy algorithm and a per-ception predictor that learns to evaluate placements quickly.
To optimize the placement of roadside LiDAR, it is nec-essary to tackle the efficiency problem. A straightforward method is to use the brute-force algorithm, which searches all possible combinations of selected locations (i.e., CM
N choices in total). However, with the number of selected
LiDAR M and potential setup locations N increasing, the runtime of the brute-force algorithm becomes unacceptable.
Fortunately, we observe that if we select the LiDAR place-ment sequentially, the obtained perceptual performance ex-hibits an intuitive diminishing returns property, also known as submodularity [18, 28].
Our proposed perceptual gain based greedy algorithm uses this property to obtain approximate optimal solutions that dramatically reduce computation time. Specifically, we place the LiDAR sequentially and choose the potential lo-cation to maximize the perceptual gain. The perceptual gain is defined as the increase in perception ability when a newly added LiDAR is placed. To obtain perceptual gain, testing the LiDAR configuration on datasets and calculating Aver-age Precision (AP) is a straightforward way. However, it is still inefficient because calculating the AP on a large dataset is also time-consuming. To overcome this challenge, we de-velop a novel perception predictor that can predict the per-ception ability of a LiDAR placement using only a single frame of point cloud data. Additionally, we create a dataset called “Roadside-3D” using the realistic self-driving sim-ulator, CARLA [8] since no suitable dataset for roadside
LiDAR optimization research exists. We conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness of our proposed method.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to study the optimization problem of roadside LiDAR place-ment. We build the “Roadside-3D” dataset using the
CARLA simulator to facilitate the related research.
• We propose a perceptual gain based greedy algorithm that obtains approximate optimal solutions for road-side LiDAR placement optimization. This approach dramatically reduces the computational time compared to the simple brute-force algorithm.
• We introduce a novel perception predictor that can quickly obtain the perceptual gain by predicting the perception ability of a LiDAR placement. 2.