Abstract
Learning discriminative features from very few labeled samples to identify novel classes has received increasing at-tention in skeleton-based action recognition. Existing works aim to learn action-specific embeddings by exploiting either intra-skeleton or inter-skeleton spatial associations, which may lead to less discriminative representations. To address these issues, we propose a novel Parallel Attention Interac-tion Network (PAINet) that incorporates two complementary branches to strengthen the match by inter-skeleton and intra-skeleton correlation. Specifically, a topology encoding mod-ule utilizing topology and physical information is proposed to enhance the modeling of interactive parts and joint pairs in both branches. In the Cross Spatial Alignment branch, we employ a spatial cross-attention module to establish joint associations across sequences, and a directional Average
Symmetric Surface Metric is introduced to locate the closest temporal similarity. In parallel, the Cross Temporal Align-ment branch incorporates a spatial self-attention module to aggregate spatial context within sequences as well as applies the temporal cross-attention network to correct misalignment temporally and calculate similarity. Extensive experiments on three skeleton benchmarks, namely NTU-T, NTU-S, and
Kinetics, demonstrate the superiority of our framework and consistently outperform state-of-the-art methods. 1.

Introduction
Skeleton-based action recognition [48, 2] has attracted increasing attention in recent years, which is a predominant topic in many fields ranging from human-robot interaction to virtual reality, due to its action-focusing nature and compact-ness [6]. However, how to identify novel actions still remains an open issue. To overcome this problem, more and more works have focused on few-shot action recognition, which
∗Corresponding author.
Figure 1: In classifying the samples with similar appearances, the intra-sample representations exhibit body-level comprehensive features, requiring cross-attention to identify subtle differences between joints. In contrast, for samples with inconsistent motion patterns, the inter-sample relationships only reveal differences, necessitating self-attention to enhance the richness of the action. can alleviate the resulting performance degradation for the rare category [10, 27, 20, 43, 12]. In particular, these meth-ods explore both the unlabeled query and labeled support sets, so as to learn a discriminative feature representation to match query actions with categories represented by a few support samples [35, 9].
As shown in Figure 1, current approaches focus on how to exploit intra-skeleton or inter-skeleton relations while ignor-ing the complementarity between the two paradigms. They are prone to failure in challenging scenarios, such as similar spatial appearances or inconsistent temporal dependencies.
On the one hand, some works try to learn discriminative features within sequences. For example, [3, 52, 26, 21, 31] utilize local joint features within the skeleton to capture
distinct patterns. In particular, [3] proposes a part-aware spatial region aggregation, and [52] takes the selective sum of body-part-based local embedding to obtain the individ-ual representation. On the other hand, some works explore adjusting local features across sequences to identify sim-ilarities and differences. For example, [25] leverages the cross-attention mechanism to activate their spatial informa-tion, and [40] achieves optimal alignment in the temporal and camera viewpoint spaces between query and support.
Even though significant progress has been achieved, we still argue that considering either the dependency within se-quences or the association between sequences is inadequate, which necessitates aligning the above samples in parallel.
As shown in Figure 1 (a), when classifying samples with similar appearances, such as take off headphone and take off glass, subtle differences in the spatial position of hand and elbow joints assist in identifying. The interaction be-tween sequences can amplify class-specific information by prioritizing the distinguishing joints, thereby requiring only optimal temporal set matching to identify. For another, when classifying samples with inconsistent motion patterns in Fig-ure 1 (b), such as wave up, the elbow and torso joints have distant paths within two graphs but share a solid seman-tic connection. In such cases, it is necessary to enhance instance-specific information through context aggregation within sequences. With the enrichment of action features, temporally adaptive interactions between sequences can fur-ther improve the alignment.
Motivated by this, we propose a novel few-shot skeleton-based action recognition framework, termed as Parallel
Attention Interaction Network (PAINet). We argue that adapting both inter-skeleton and intra-skeleton local joint features are indispensable ways to perfect spatial match-ing. Compared to previous works, our approach involves the alignment of the spatial and temporal domains within two parallel branches, enabling complementary attention to informative regions in the skeleton sequence. Specif-ically, we propose a topology encoding module utilizing topology and physical information to enhance the model-ing of interactive parts and joint pairs in both branches. In the Cross Spatial Alignment branch, we employ a spatial cross-attention module to build associations of joints across sequences. Afterward, we introduce a directional average symmetric surface metric, which considers all possible pairs of subsequences and selects the pair with maximum similar-ity. In the Cross Temporal Alignment branch, we propose a spatial self-attention module to aggregate spatial context within sequences. Subsequently, we follow the video-based approach TRX [27] and aggregate the aligned distances by temporal cross-attention matcher. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel PAINet for few-shot skeleton-based action recognition, which mitigates challenges posed by similar spatial appearances and inconsistent temporal dependencies during matching.
• We further design a topology encoding module to cap-ture the co-movement between joints and body parts, as well as the intrinsic semantic relations between joints.
Also, a directional average symmetric surface metric is proposed to discover the closest temporal relation.
• Extensive experimental results on NTU-T, NTU-S, and
Kinetics demonstrate that our model significantly out-performs the state-of-the-art methods. 2.