Abstract
Recently, polar-based representation has shown promis-ing properties in perceptual tasks. In addition to Cartesian-based approaches, which separate point clouds unevenly, representing point clouds as polar grids has been recog-nized as an alternative due to (1) its advantage in robust performance under different resolutions and (2) its supe-riority in streaming-based approaches. However, state-of-the-art polar-based detection methods inevitably suffer from the feature distortion problem because of the non-uniform division of polar representation, resulting in a non-negligible performance gap compared to Cartesian-based approaches. To tackle this issue, we present PARTNER, a novel 3D object detector in the polar coordinate. PARTNER alleviates the dilemma of feature distortion with global rep-resentation re-alignment and facilitates the regression by introducing instance-level geometric information into the detection head. Extensive experiments show overwhelming advantages in streaming-based detection and different reso-lutions. Furthermore, our method outperforms the previous polar-based works with remarkable margins of 3.68% and 9.15% on Waymo and ONCE validation set, thus achieving competitive results over the state-of-the-art methods. 1.

Introduction 3D object detection serves as an indispensable compo-nent in 3D scene understanding for autonomous driving.
With increased affordability and accessibility, LiDAR sen-sors are now widely adopted for accurate localization. Un-like regular camera images, LiDAR point cloud has its own unordered, unstructured and sparse nature, thus requiring an effective representation for 3D object detection algorithms in real world.
Prior arts have explored a variety of representations for point clouds. Point-based approaches [24, 31, 30] directly
*Equally contributed.
†Li Zhang (lizhangfd@fudan.edu.cn) is the corresponding author at
School of Data Science, Fudan University set.
Figure 1. The superiority of polar representation. Experiments are conducted on Waymo val. (a) Performance compari-son between different volumetric representations. When enlarging the voxel size of 3D detector CenterPoint [32], replacing cuboid-shaped voxelization with a polar-based one could significantly re-duce the performance drop, indicating the accuracy robustness of polar representation. (b) Performance in a streaming-based archi-tecture. Our PARTNER outperforms the state-of-the-art streaming detector PolarStream [3] with remarkable margins. process raw points by PointNet and its variants [20, 21], which also suffer from time-consuming neighbor sampling and grouping operations. Range-based methods [13, 7, 2] represent the LiDAR points in a 2.5D manifold structure.
Its compactness enables fast neighbor queries and avoids computation on the empty zone, yet its performance still falls behind other representations. Alternatively, grid-based methods [36, 12, 29, 32, 28] generally transform irregu-lar point clouds into 2D pillars or 3D voxels, and gen-erate 3D boxes in bird’s-eye-view (BEV). Due to their reasonable computation cost and high performance, these methods have currently dominated the 3D detection bench-mark on large-scale datasets [1, 25]. Nevertheless, popular
Cartesian-based volumetric representation encounters the problem of non-uniform density distribution over distances, where nearby region has much greater density than the dis-tant. To guarantee affordable memory cost, cells close to sensors have to discard many points during encoding, thus
ceptive fields, which leads to misalignment over global fea-ture maps. Although PolarStream [3] has attempted to ad-dress this issue by employing range-stratified convolutions, the cumbersome design fails to re-align the features for fea-sible object recognition. Moreover, traditional CNN-based polar heads undergo difficulties in box prediction. Owing to the difference in the coordinate system between feature representation and our targeted 3D bounding box, the con-volution operation fails to capture the geometric clues in
Cartesian coordinates, resulting in regression difficulty.
To address the above issues, we present a novel PolAr
RepresenTatioN detEctoR, dubbed PARTNER, to learn effective representation in polar coordinates. We intro-duce two key components, namely global representation re-alignment module and geometry-aware adaptive module.
Global representation re-alignment module employs a novel attention mechanism to re-align the features between ob-jects. To avoid introducing background noise and efficiently enlarge the receptive field for information interaction, we first condense each column of polar features into a few rep-resentative points. This operation is based on polar-specific observation that features along radial direction only contain limited information due to the occlusion in LiDAR scan-ning. After radial feature condensing, angular-wise self-attention is conducted based on those representative points for global feature alignment. In addition, to facilitate box regression, geometry-aware adaptive module leverages aux-iliary supervision to introduce extra geometric and instance information to each pixel. Then the predicted information is explicitly introduced into a self-attention mechanism for feature aggregation. Equipped with the proposed designs, our polar 3D detector achieves superior performance over
Cartesian-based methods.
In brief, our contributions are summarized as follows: (i) We explore the feature distortion problem in polar repre-sentation and propose a novel LiDAR-based 3D object de-tector, dubbed PARTNER, in the polar coordinate system. (ii) We introduce two polar-tailored designs: a global repre-sentation re-alignment module to undistort polar-based fea-tures and a geometry-aware adaptive module for accurate box prediction. (iii) We extensively validate the effective-ness of our designs on the Waymo and ONCE datasets. Par-ticularly, our PARTNER achieves competitive results over the state-of-the-art methods and demonstrates overwhelm-ing advantages in streaming and low resolution scenarios. 2.