Abstract
Bias mitigation in image classification has been widely researched, and existing methods have yielded notable re-sults. However, most of these methods implicitly assume that a given image contains only one type of known or un-known bias, failing to consider the complexities of real-world biases. We introduce a more challenging scenario, agnostic biases mitigation, aiming at bias removal regard-less of whether the type of bias or the number of types is unknown in the datasets. To address this difficult task, we present the Partition-and-Debias (PnD) method that uses a mixture of biases-specific experts to implicitly divide the bias space into multiple subspaces and a gating module to find a consensus among experts to achieve debiased classifi-cation. Experiments on both public and constructed bench-marks demonstrated the efficacy of the PnD. Code is avail-able at: https://github.com/Jiaxuan-Li/PnD. 1.

Introduction
One of the reasons for poor generalization in image classification is the presence of biased features in training data [19, 31, 13], which distracts the model from learning the target features associated with the classification objects.
Thus, accurately capturing the target features while reduc-ing the influence of these biases1 has become a critical issue, resulting in increased bias mitigation research [26].
Unlike most previous studies that implicitly assumed that only one type of known/unknown bias exists in a given image, we investigate the coexistence of multiple unknown biases in an image. For instance, most young samples in
CelebA [17] are associated with the female, attractive, and lipstick categories (Fig. 1a), whereas the old samples have corresponding yet reversed ones. Consequently, for the age (young/old) classification in CelebA, these three biases, including gender, attractiveness, and wearing lipstick, de-grade the prediction performance. Overall, we discovered that 43.75% of the young samples had three biases, which means they were all annotated with female, attractive, and lipstick, whereas 58.28% of the samples had at least two of them (Fig. 1b). The old samples show similar patterns.
These observations imply that multiple biases are inevitable in a given image. At the same time, we cannot determine all types of bias that may appear in the image. Dealing with multiple unknown biases is thus emergent, and cannot be fully solved using prior methods (Fig. 1c) because (i) they fail to capture the biases of different types and (ii) removing a single bias does not always eliminate the effects of all bi-ases. Therefore, we introduce a more challenging scenario, agnostic biases, in which the unknown biases include not only the type of bias, but also the number of types. Here, we use “agnostic biases” to bring attention to biases in real-world scenarios, where the bias type and number of types are unknown. We do not use “unknown biases” proposed in [9], because it ignores multiple unknown biases. Our scenario overcomes the existing bias constraints, boosting the performance of real-world applications.
We hypothesized and empirically found that the features of agnostic biases scatter at different depths of the network depending on the biases’ nature. Even if multiple biases are entangled at the same depth, they can be be regarded as one type of bias. Thus, agnostic biases can be grouped by their feature levels and processed individually at different net-work depths. As a result, we propose a Partition-and-Debias (PnD) approach based on the divide-and-conquer strategy to capture and remove agnostic biases at different levels for debiased classification. Thus, the entire agnostic bias sce-nario space is divided into multiple subscenario spaces that can be handled by multiple biases-specific experts. The fi-nal prediction is obtained based on the consensus of all the experts using a gating module. Our contributions are:
• We present a Partition-and-Debias approach to solve the new scenario via a mixture of biases-specific experts.
• On both public and our constructed challenging bias datasets, experimental results show that the proposed method achieves cutting-edge performance. 2.