Abstract
Synthetic data offers the promise of cheap and bountiful training data for settings where labeled real-world data is scarce. However, models trained on synthetic data signif-icantly underperform when evaluated on real-world data.
In this paper, we propose Proportional Amplitude Spectrum
Training Augmentation (PASTA), a simple and effective aug-mentation strategy to improve out-of-the-box synthetic-to-real (syn-to-real) generalization performance. PASTA per-turbs the amplitude spectra of synthetic images in the Fourier domain to generate augmented views. Specifically, with
PASTA we propose a structured perturbation strategy where high-frequency components are perturbed relatively more than the low-frequency ones. For the tasks of semantic seg-mentation (GTAV→Real), object detection (Sim10K→Real), and object recognition (VisDA-C Syn→Real), across a total of 5 syn-to-real shifts, we find that PASTA outperforms more complex state-of-the-art generalization methods while being complementary to the same. 1.

Introduction
For complex tasks, deep models often rely on training with substantial labeled data. Real-world data can be ex-pensive to label and an available labeled training set often captures only a limited set of real-world appearance diver-sity. Synthetic data offers an opportunity to cheaply gen-erate diverse samples that can better cover the anticipated variance of real-world test data. However, models trained on synthetic data often struggle to generalize to real world data – e.g., the performance of a vanilla DeepLabv3+ [13] (ResNet-50 backbone) architecture on semantic segmenta-tion drops from 73.45 mIoU on GTAV [58] to 28.95 mIoU on Cityscapes [18] for the same set of classes. Several ap-proaches have been considered to tackle this problem.
*Equal Contribution. Correspondence to prithviijt3@gatech.edu
Figure 1: PASTA augmentation samples. A synthetic image from GTAV [58] when augmented with RandAugment [19]
[Top] and PASTA [Bottom]. We find that PASTA creates aug-mented views different from existing photometric operations.
In this paper, we propose a novel augmentation strategy, called Proportional Amplitude Spectrum Training Augmen-tation (PASTA), to address the synthetic-to-real generaliza-tion problem. PASTA, as an augmentation strategy for syn-thetic data, aims to satisfy three key criteria: (1) strong out-of-the-box generalization performance, (2) plug-and-play compatibility with existing methods, and (3) benefits across tasks, backbones, and shifts. PASTA achieves this by perturbing the amplitude spectra (obtained by applying 2D
FFT to input images) of the source synthetic images in the
Fourier domain. While prior work has explored augment-ing images in the Fourier domain [71, 73, 31], they mostly rely on the observations that – (1) among the amplitude and phase spectra, phase tends to capture more high-level seman-tics [52, 51, 55, 25, 72] and (2) low-frequency (LF) bands of the amplitude spectrum tend to capture style information / low-level statistics (illumination, lighting, etc.) [73].
We further observe that synthetic images have less di-versity in the high-frequency (HF) bands of their amplitude spectra compared to real images (see Sec. 3.3 for a detailed discussion). Motivated by these key observations, PASTA provides a structured way to perturb the amplitude spectra of
source synthetic images to ensure that a model is exposed to more variations in high-frequency components during train-ing. We empirically observe that by relying on such a simple set of motivating observations, PASTA leads to significant im-provements in synthetic-to-real generalization performance – e.g., out-of-the-box GTAV [58]→Cityscapes [18] general-ization performance of a vanilla DeepLabv3+ (ResNet-50 backbone) model improves from 28.95 mIoU to 44.12 mIoU – a 15+ absolute mIoU point improvement!
PASTA involves the following steps. Given an input image, we apply 2D Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) to obtain the corresponding amplitude and phase spectra in the Fourier domain. For every spatial frequency [m, n] in the amplitude spectrum, we sample a multiplicative jitter value ϵ such that the perturbation strength increases monotonically with
[m, n], thereby, ensuring that higher frequency components in the amplitude spectrum are perturbed more compared to the lower frequency ones. Finally, given the perturbed amplitude and the original phase spectra, we can apply an inverse 2D Fast Fourier Transform (iFFT) to obtain the augmented image. This simple strategy of applying fine-grained structured perturbations to the amplitude spectra of synthetic images leads to strong out-of-the-box generalization without the need for specialized components, task-specific design, or changes to learning rules. Fig. 1 shows an example image augmented by PASTA.
To summarize, we make the following contributions:
• We introduce Proportional Amplitude Spectrum Training
Augmentation (PASTA), a simple and effective augmenta-tion strategy for synthetic-to-real generalization. PASTA perturbs the amplitude spectra of synthetic images so as to expose a model to more high-frequency variations.
• We show that applying PASTA sets the new state of the art for synthetic-to-real generalization for 3 tasks –
Semantic Segmentation (GTAV [58]→{Cityscapes [18],
Mapillary [48], BDD100K [76]}), Object Detection (Sim10K [33]→Cityscapes) and Object Recognition (VisDA-C [54] Syn→Real) – covering a total of 5 syn-to-real shifts with multiple backbones.
• Our experimental results demonstrate that PASTA– (1) frequently enables a baseline model to outperform pre-vious state-of-the-art approaches that rely on specialized architectural components, additional synthetic or real data, or alternate objectives; (2) is complementary to existing methods; (3) outperforms prior adaptive object detection methods; and (4) either outperforms or is competitive with current augmentation strategies. 2.