Abstract
Humans are highly adaptable, swiftly switching between different modes to progressively handle different tasks, situ-ations and contexts. In Human-object interaction (HOI) ac-tivities, these modes can be attributed to two mechanisms: (1) the large-scale consistent plan for the whole activity and (2) the small-scale children interactive actions that start and end along the timeline. While neuroscience and cog-nitive science have confirmed this multi-mechanism nature of human behavior, machine modeling approaches for hu-man motion are trailing behind. While attempting to use gradually morphing structures (e.g., graph attention net-works) to model the dynamic HOI patterns, they miss the expeditious and discrete mode-switching nature of the hu-man motion. To bridge that gap, this work proposes to model two concurrent mechanisms that jointly control hu-man motion: the Persistent process that runs continually on the global scale, and the Transient sub-processes that op-erate intermittently on the local context of the human while interacting with objects. These two mechanisms form an interactive Persistent-Transient Duality that synergistically governs the activity sequences. We model this conceptual duality by a parent-child neural network of Persistent and
Transient channels with a dedicated neural module for dy-namic mechanism switching. The framework is trialed on
HOI motion forecasting. On two rich datasets and a wide variety of settings, the model consistently delivers superior performances, proving its suitability for the challenge. 1.

Introduction
In a planned activity that involves interaction with ob-jects, the patterns of human motion vary greatly, contex-tualized to the situation and stages of the plan. The vari-ety of patterns comes from the fact that the subject needs to switch between multiple modes of operations: navigat-ing the global scene according to the plan, and occasionally concentrate on a small set of objects to act on them. This
Figure 1: We model the human motions by a duality of two types of processes: A single Persistent process (red box) considers the whole activity plan and trajectory (red curve) and use dense relational structure (red graph). Its children
Transient processes (green boxes) work on the small and local spatiotemporal scope of a human and the interacted objects using egocentric structure (green graph). They get turn on and off on-demand by the Persistent process. mode-switching nature requires a machine model to adapt quickly in structure, representation, and inference mecha-nisms to follow the patterns of the behavior. This observa-tion is confirmed by neuroscience findings that human brain activity contains transient networks that deals with particu-lar situation [4]. In cognitive science, human activities are also proved to follow parent-child planning patterns [2].
Recent advancements in graph neural networks [43] al-low motion models to dynamically adjust their relational structure to adapt to changing situations [8]. However, with a singular inference mechanism, they can only have grad-ual adaptation: smoothly adjusting parameters of the same model. They cannot account for quick and abrupt changes regarding the discrete switching between distinctive mech-anisms and as a result fail to keep up with the movement patterns. This limitation is inherent in human-object inter-action motion (HOI-M) prediction. Fig. 1 visualizes an ex-ample activity of cooking a dinner meal. Here the subject navigates around the kitchen following a recipe and con-1
sider the whole kitchen floor plan (red trajectory in Fig. 1).
Occasionally, they deviate to perform a particular action by interacting with an object (green sections in Fig. 1) such as moving a bowl, where only the bowl needs their attention.
When this happens, these models will continue to consider the interacted object as an equal member of the scene and miss its importance as the direct recipient of the action.
To address this limitation, we explore a new modeling paradigm that factorizes the human-object interaction into two internal types of processes: a Persistent process (red box in Fig. 1) which maintains a continuous large-scale ac-tivity progress; and Transient sub-processes (green boxes in
Fig. 1) which has an adaptive life cycle and a personalized structure to reflects the small-scale local interaction with objects. The Transient act as Persistent’s sub-processes, and they can be turned on or off by a switch (on/off arrows in
Fig. 1) operating on signal from the main Persistent process.
The parent-child relationship connects the two types of pro-cesses and constitutes the Persistent-Transient Duality.
This modeling is related to similar transient concepts in other fields such as control theory [22], electrical [19] and
In computer engineering, chemical engineering [41, 14]. the parent-child relationship also resembles the operating system and the children task-specific processes.
We model this concept into a multi-channel neural net-work called Persistent-Transient Duality (PTD) networks for Human-object interaction motion (HOI-M) prediction.
The Persistent channel contains a recurrent relational net-work operating on the global scene spatially and throughout the session temporally. The Transient channels instead have contextualized structures constructed on the spot whenever the human subjects shift the priority toward interacting with a subset of objects. The life cycles of these spontaneous channels are managed by a neural Transient Switch, which anticipates the initialization and termination of many Tran-sient processes along a single Persistent process.
The benefit of PTD is demonstrated via motion forecast-ing experiments on WBHM and Bimanual Actions datasets where it sets new SOTA performances and generalizability tests. Being a generic framework for human behavior mod-eling, PTD is readily applicable to other problems such as pedestrian trajectory prediction of which preliminary adap-tation and experiment are shown in the supplementary.
The key contributions of this work are: 1. The exploration of the new Persistent-transient du-ality concept to model the multi-mechanism nature of hu-man behavior reflected in the large-small temporal scale and global-local spatial scope of HOI motions. 2. A parent-children neural framework with egocentric design that applies the PTD concept in HOI-M prediction. 3. The extensive analysis demonstrating that PTD sets new SoTA in HOI-M prediction across multiple datasets and settings, and generalizes better to new scenarios. 2.