Abstract 1.

Introduction
We present a novel motion prior, called PhaseMP, mod-eling a probability distribution on pose transitions con-ditioned by a frequency domain feature extracted from a periodic autoencoder. The phase feature further enforces the pose transitions to be unidirectional (i.e. no backward movement in time), from which more stable and natural mo-tions can be generated. Specifically, our motion prior can be useful for accurately estimating 3D human motions in the presence of challenging input data, including long periods of spatial and temporal occlusion, as well as noisy sensor measurements. Through a comprehensive evaluation, we demonstrate the efficacy of our novel motion prior, show-casing its superiority over existing state-of-the-art methods by a significant margin across various applications, includ-ing video-to-motion and motion estimation from sparse sen-sor data, and etc.
*Corresponding Author
Estimating human poses and motions from real-world observations is a fundamental problem in computer vi-sion with numerous potential applications, including hu-man motion understanding, surveillance, motion capture, and human-computer interaction. Recently, there have been significant improvements in 3D human pose/motion esti-mation from 2D image/video via deep learning; specifi-cally by deploying a data-driven system trained on a paired dataset [23, 31] to learn a mapping from 2D input images to 3D body motions [42, 47, 25, 57, 66]. However, these algorithms still struggle in challenging scenarios given un-constrained real-world data. For example, highly dynamic movements can cause motion blurs, and the blurry appear-ance of the body and the environment can lead to failures in 2D key-point detection, which is a preprocessing step widely used in many 3D pose estimation algorithms. More-over, occlusions or a restricted camera field-of-view can re-sult in partial or complete lack of pose information. Al-though certain approaches have attempted to address this challenge by incorporating temporal consistency or formu-lating it as a denoising problem in the presence of artifi-cial noise [9, 31, 50], they often struggle when dealing with long-period occlusion lasting beyond one second.
In this paper, we aim to develop a 3D pose/motion esti-mation algorithm as shown in Fig 1 that can work robustly in challenging scenarios illustrated above. More specifi-cally, we propose a novel motion prior, called PhaseMP, modeling the probability distribution on pose transitions.
Our novel motion prior draws inspiration from previous models [49, 38]; however, the key distinction lies in its com-bination with a frequency domain feature extracted from a periodic autoencoder [56], further enhancing the quality and robustness of 3D pose estimation. Intuitively speaking, the phase features play a role akin to long-term physical mo-mentum, facilitating the generation of smooth and stable movements by enforcing a unidirectional motion (i.e., no backward movement in time). Consequently, phase features contribute to imbuing the resulting motions with greater nat-uralness, particularly in scenarios where the laws of physics play a significant role. This characteristic extends to chal-lenging scenarios where other input features (e.g., joint lo-cation) are only partially observable. The underlying am-biguity arising from insufficient contextual cues can be sig-nificantly reduced by enforcing the model to maintain the current momentum.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our motion prior in solving challenging video-to-motion estimation problems, where a large portion of the body is partially invisible for a long period of time due to occlusions or being out-of-sight. Additionally, we showcase its capabilities in address-ing other problems such as denoising 3D motion data or estimating full 3D pose from end-effectors only. Through comprehensive evaluation, we demonstrate that our system outperforms state-of-the-art baselines with a large margin.
The paper’s contributions can be summarized as follows: (1) a novel motion prior, combined with the phase feature, applicable to a wide range of 3D human pose estimation systems, (2) a new optimization framework incorporating phase feature energy, which can work robustly for many challenging scenarios where the observation is incomplete or ambiguous in temporal and spatial domains, (3) a com-prehensive evaluation showcasing that our system outper-forms existing state-of-the-art methods by a large margin, not only in ordinary scenarios but also in challenging sce-narios. 2.