Abstract
The cloud-based multimedia service becomes increas-ingly popular in the last decade, however, it poses a serious threat to the client’s privacy. To address this issue, many methods utilized image encryption as a defense mechanism.
However, the encrypted images look quite different from the natural images, making them vulnerable to attackers.
In this paper, we propose a novel method namely PIRNet, which operates privacy-preserving image restoration in the steganographic domain. Compared to existing methods, our method offers significant advantages in terms of invisibil-ity and security. Specifically, we first propose a wavelet
Lifting-based Invertible Hiding (LIH) network to conceal the secret image into the stego image. Then, a Lifting-based
Secure Restoration (LSR) network is utilized to perform im-age restoration in the steganographic domain. Since the secret image remains hidden throughout the whole image restoration process, the privacy of clients can be largely en-sured. In addition, since the stego image looks visually the same as the cover image, the attackers can hardly discover it, which significantly improves the security. The experi-mental results on different datasets show the superiority of our PIRNet over the existing methods on various privacy-preserving image restoration tasks, including image denois-ing, deblurring and super-resolution. 1.

Introduction
Recently, the cloud-based multimedia services have de-veloped rapidly with the fast growing cloud computing technology. The Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) [5] such as
Amazon Web Service (AWS) [1] and Google Cloud Plat-form (GCP) [2] provides strong computing resource to the clients, which allows them to perform efficient image pro-cessing online. However, image processing in the cloud
*Corresponding author
Figure 1. An illustration of the working process of the proposed method for privacy-preserving image restoration over cloud. The low-quality (LQ) secret image is first concealed into a stego image.
Then, the secure image restoration is operated on the stego image to preserve privacy. Finally, the high-quality (HQ) secret image can be revealed from the processed stego image. poses a serious threat to the client’s privacy. A hacker or a malicious service provider can easily access the clients’ private photos, and discover their personal identity, social connections, and visited places for unauthorized uses.
To tackle the security and privacy issue, many re-searchers have dived into the area of privacy-preserving im-age processing [17][34][28]. In these methods, image en-cryption is regarded as an important line of defense for pri-vacy protection. They first utilized the homomorphic en-cryption [23] method to encrypt images. Then, the im-age processing is operated in the encrypted domain without decrypting the source image to achieve privacy protection.
However, these encryption based methods have a big disad-vantage, i.e., the encrypted images look quite different from the original images, making them more vulnerable to the at-tackers. Additionally, they rely on complex homomorphic crypto-system for encryption, which can be computation-ally heavy for real-time applications.
Different from the existing methods, we propose a novel method to operate privacy-preserving image restoration in the steganographic domain, which has a significant advan-tage in terms of invisibility and security. As shown in Fig. 1, the steganographic technique allows the secret image to be concealed within the cover image, resulting in a stego im-age that looks quite similar to the cover one. That makes it quite difficult for attackers to detect the secret image. In ad-dition, all restoration operations are performed on the stego images. The secret image will not be disclosed both in im-age transmission and cloud server, which can significantly reduce the risk of privacy leakage and breach. In addition to the above benefits, our approach does not require the com-plex homomorphic cryptosystem, which saves on computa-tional cost. The success of our method relies on our impor-tant finding, i.e., when the image concealing and revealing processes are invertible, the quality change of the stego im-age can sensitively and stably affect the quality of the re-covered secret image. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
• We propose a wavelet lifting based privacy-preserving image restoration network, namely PIRNet, to achieve confidential image restoration in steganographic do-main without revealing the source image.
• We reveal an important finding about the correlation between the quality change of stego image and the re-stored secret image, which lays a great foundation for our network design for confidential image restoration. 2.