Abstract
Front
Top
Side
In this paper, we develop a new method to automat-ically convert 2D line drawings from three orthographic views into 3D CAD models. Existing methods for this prob-lem reconstruct 3D models by back-projecting the 2D ob-servations into 3D space while maintaining explicit cor-respondence between the input and output. Such methods are sensitive to errors and noises in the input, thus often fail in practice where the input drawings created by hu-man designers are imperfect. To overcome this difficulty, we leverage the attention mechanism in a Transformer-based sequence generation model to learn flexible mappings be-tween the input and output. Further, we design shape pro-grams which are suitable for generating the objects of inter-est to boost the reconstruction accuracy and facilitate CAD modeling applications. Experiments on a new benchmark dataset show that our method significantly outperforms ex-isting ones when the inputs are noisy or incomplete. 1.

Introduction
In this paper, we tackle a long-standing problem in computer-aided design (CAD), namely 3D object recon-struction from three orthographic views. In today’s product design and manufacturing industry, 2D engineering draw-ings are commonly used by designers to realize, update, and share their ideas, especially during the initial design stages.
But to enable further analysis (e.g., finite element analy-sis) and manufacturing, these 2D designs must be manually realized as 3D models in CAD software. Therefore, if a method can automatically convert the 2D drawings into 3D models, it would greatly facilitate the design process and improve overall efficiency.
As the most popular way to describe an object in 2D
†Work done during internship at Manycore Tech Inc.
∗Equal contributions.
Figure 1. An illustration of various input drawings. From top to bottom: clean inputs, noisy inputs, and visible inputs. We use solid and dashed lines to represent the visible and hidden lines, respectively. In noisy line drawings (the second row), we use blue lines to represent noisy lines and highlight the missing lines using the red circle. drawings, an orthographic view is the projection of the ob-ject onto the plane that is perpendicular to one of the three principal axes (Figure 1). Over the past few decades, 3D reconstruction from three orthographic views has been ex-tensively studied, with significant improvements in terms of the types of applicable objects and computational effi-ciency [25, 10, 19, 37, 38, 28, 18, 21, 8, 9]. However, to the best of our knowledge, these techniques have not enjoyed wide adoption in CAD software and commercial products.
Among the challenges faced by existing methods in prac-tice, their sensitivity to errors and missing components in the drawings is arguably the most critical one. To under-stand this issue, we note that almost all existing methods follow a standard procedure for 3D reconstruction, which (i) generate 3D vertices consists of the following steps: from 2D vertices; (ii) generate 3D edges from 3D vertices;
associated with the cabinet.
To systematically evaluate the methods, we build a new benchmark dataset consisting of more than 26,000 3D cab-inet models for this task. Most of them are created by pro-fessional interior designers using commercial 3D modeling software. Extensive experiments show that our method is much more robust to imperfect inputs. For example, the tra-ditional method achieves an F1 score of 8.20% when 30% of the lines are corrupted or missing in the input drawings, whereas our method achieves an F1 score of 90.14%.
In summary, the contributions of this work are: (i) To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to use deep gen-erative models in the task of 3D CAD model reconstruction from three orthographic views. Compared to existing meth-ods, our model learns a more flexible mapping between the input and output, thus being more robust to noisy or incom-(ii) We propose a new network design that plete inputs. learns shape programs to assemble planks into 3D cabinet models. Such a design not only improves reconstruction ac-curacy but also facilitates downstream applications such as
CAD model editing. 2.