Abstract
We show that crowd counting can be viewed as a decom-posable point querying process. This formulation enables arbitrary points as input and jointly reasons whether the points are crowd and where they locate. The querying pro-cessing, however, raises an underlying problem on the num-ber of necessary querying points. Too few imply underesti-mation; too many increase computational overhead. To ad-dress this dilemma, we introduce a decomposable structure, i.e., the point-query quadtree, and propose a new counting model, termed Point quEry Transformer (PET). PET im-plements decomposable point querying via data-dependent quadtree splitting, where each querying point could split into four new points when necessary, thus enabling dy-namic processing of sparse and dense regions. Such a querying process yields an intuitive, universal modeling of crowd as both the input and output are interpretable and steerable. We demonstrate the applications of PET on a number of crowd-related tasks, including fully-supervised crowd counting and localization, partial annotation learn-ing, and point annotation refinement, and also report state-of-the-art performance. For the first time, we show that a single counting model can address multiple crowd-related tasks across different learning paradigms. Code is avail-able at https://github.com/cxliu0/PET. 1.

Introduction
Crowd counting aims to estimate the number of crowd from an image. Existing approaches typically address counting by learning surrogate targets such as density maps, where the count is acquired by integrating the inferred den-sity map. Despite being effective, they cannot provide an intuitive understanding of the crowd, i.e., no instance-level information is provided, which impedes high-level crowd
*corresponding author analysis. Instead of merely predicting a count value from an image, some approaches focus on estimating the fine-grained information of crowd by either a head bounding box [21, 26] or a single head point [3, 17, 29]. The former casts crowd counting as a head detection problem. How-ever, the detection accuracy has no guarantee in theory due to the lack of box information. In contrast, the latter directly outputs the head points, bypassing the error-prone stage of bounding box estimation. Nevertheless, they often require post-processing [3, 17] to obtain the location of each person.
As a result, congested scenes may render failures of count-ing or localization. In addition, prior arts typically tackle a specific counting task or a learning paradigm; each requires a customized design. This impedes their use in different ap-plications or tasks. For example, a fully-supervised count-ing model often cannot well address semi-supervised crowd counting [39].
In this work, we formulate crowd counting as a decom-posable point querying process. The point querying design allows a model to receive arbitrary points as input and to reason whether each point is a person and where it locates.
An appealing property of this design is that it provides an intuitive and universal modeling of crowd. To be specific, the intuition lies in that each querying point physically cor-responds to a person or background. The arbitrariness of querying points implies that the position and the number of input points are both steerable. Therefore, by simply adjust-ing the input, our formulation naturally fits different crowd-related tasks, such as fully-supervised crowd counting and localization, partial annotation learning [39], and point an-notation refinement (Fig. 1c).
However, since an input image may contain an arbitrary number of crowd, it is non-trivial to predefine the number of querying points. In practice, too few points lead to un-derestimation, while too many points yield a large compu-tational cost. To tackle this pitfall, we present a decompos-able structure—point-query quadtree. The key advantage of the quadtree is that it allows data-dependent splitting, where
Figure 1: Comparison between prior arts and our point-query counting paradigm. In contrast to (a) prior arts, we consider arbitrary points as input, and reason whether each point is a person and where the person locates. We devise (b) a point-query quadtree to deal with dense crowd with adaptive tree splitting. The query design renders PET an intuitive and universal approach, enabling (c) various applications, such as fully-supervised crowd counting and localization, partial annotation learning, and point annotation refinement. one querying point could split into several new ones when necessary, hence enabling dynamic processing of sparse and dense regions. Based on the quadtree, we instantiate a Point quEry Transformer (PET) to achieve decomposable point querying, as shown in Fig. 1b. Another key ingredient of
PET is the progressive rectangle window attention, where the querying process is performed within a local window rather than the whole image in a progressive manner for ef-ficient inference.
Extensive experiments on four crowd-counting bench-marks show that PET exhibits many appealing proper-ties: i) generic: PET is applicable to several crowd-related tasks, such as fully-supervised crowd counting and local-ization, partial annotation learning, and point annotation re-finement; ii) effective: PET reports state-of-the-art crowd counting and localization performance against recent ap-proaches. In particular, it achieves a mean absolute error (MAE) of 49.34 on the ShanghaiTech PartA [42] dataset; iii) intuitive: PET can proceed with the point query that physically corresponds to an object or background, and out-puts also interpretable points.
The contributions of this work include the following:
• We show that decomposable point querying can be a universal crowd modeling idea to potentially unify crowd-related tasks.
• We present PET, a Point Query Transformer for crowd counting, featured by the point-query quadtree and progressive rectangle window attention. 2.