Abstract
We present Point-TTA, a novel test-time adaptation framework for point cloud registration (PCR) that improves the generalization and the performance of registration mod-els. While learning-based approaches have achieved im-pressive progress, generalization to unknown testing envi-ronments remains a major challenge due to the variations in 3D scans. Existing methods typically train a generic model and the same trained model is applied on each instance dur-ing testing. This could be sub-optimal since it is difficult for the same model to handle all the variations during testing.
In this paper, we propose a test-time adaptation approach for PCR. Our model can adapt to unseen distributions at test-time without requiring any prior knowledge of the test data. Concretely, we design three self-supervised auxiliary tasks that are optimized jointly with the primary PCR task.
Given a test instance, we adapt our model using these aux-iliary tasks and the updated model is used to perform the inference. During training, our model is trained using a meta-auxiliary learning approach, such that the adapted model via auxiliary tasks improves the accuracy of the pri-mary task. Experimental results demonstrate the effective-ness of our approach in improving generalization of point cloud registration and outperforming other state-of-the-art approaches. 1.

Introduction
Given a pair of overlapping 3D point clouds, the goal of point cloud registration (PCR) is to estimate the 3D trans-formation that aligns these point clouds. PCR plays a vi-tal role in a variety of applications, such as autonomous driving [7], augmented reality [5], and robotics [30]. Stan-dard PCR approaches start with extracting the pointwise features. These features are matched to establish the cor-respondences between points in the pair. Then an outlier rejection module is used to remove outliers since the cor-respondences obtained by feature matching are not com-pletely reliable. Finally, the correspondences are used to estimate the optimal 3D rotation and translation to align the two point cloud fragments. Traditional approaches es-tablish correspondences by matching hand-crafted features and leveraging robust iterative sampling strategies such as
RANSAC [17] for model estimation. However, these ap-proaches take a long time to converge and their accuracy drops in the presence of high outliers.
To address the limitation of traditional approaches, most recent PCR methods use learning-based approaches instead of handcrafted features. These approaches first learn a model on a labeled dataset. Then the model is fixed when evaluating on unseen test data. The single set of model pa-rameters may not be optimal for different test environments captured with different 3D scanners due to the domain shift.
Our work is inspired by the success of test-time adaption (TTA) [47] in image classification, where an auxiliary task is used to update the model parameters at inference time to learn feature representation specifically for a test instance.
In this paper, we introduce a TTA approach for point cloud registration that adapts to new distributions at test-time. Un-like existing 3D point cloud domain adaptation approaches
[27, 54, 40, 28, 51], our method does not require any prior knowledge about the test data distributions. We adapt the model parameters in an instance-specific manner during in-ference and obtain a different set of network parameters for each different instance. This allows our model to better cap-ture the uniqueness of each test instance and thus generalize better to unseen data. More importantly, our TTA formula-tion is a generic framework that can be applied in a plug-and-play manner to boost standard PCR pipelines.
Auxiliary learning has been shown to be effective to improve a predefined primary task and is used in multi-ple 2D computer vision tasks [35, 36, 47, 9]. Recently, there have been some attempts at using auxiliary tasks for improving the representation learning of 3D point clouds
[1, 24, 44, 15]. However, using auxiliary tasks for test-time adaptation is still largely unexplored for 3D point cloud data. In this work, we introduce three self-supervised auxil-iary tasks: point cloud reconstruction, feature learning, and
correspondence classification. These auxiliary tasks do not require any extra supervision.
Some recent work [9] has shown that naively training the primary task and the auxiliary task together may not be op-timal, since the model may be biased toward improving the auxiliary task rather than the primary task. Following [9], we use a meta auxiliary learning framework based on the model-agnostic meta learning (MAML) [16]. Each point cloud pair acts as a task in MAML. We update the model for each task using the auxiliary loss provided by the proposed three auxiliary tasks. The updated model is then used to per-form the primary task. The model parameters are learned in such a way that the updated model using the auxiliary tasks improve the performance of the primary registration task.
Our key contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose a test-time adaptation approach for point cloud registration. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to apply test-time adaptation for 3D point cloud registration.
• We design three self-supervised auxiliary tasks to ef-fectively extract useful features from test instances and adapt the model to unseen test distribution to improve generalization. A meta auxiliary learning paradigm is used to learn the model parameters, such that adapt-ing the model parameter via the auxiliary tasks during testing improves the performance of the primary task.
• We perform extensive experiments on 3Dmatch [56] and KITTI [19] benchmarks to show the effectiveness of our approach in improving point cloud registration performance and achieving superior results. 2.