Abstract
Pose-free neural radiance fields (NeRF) aim to train
NeRF with unposed multi-view images and it has achieved very impressive success in recent years. Most existing works share the pipeline of training a coarse pose estimator with rendered images at first, followed by a joint optimization of estimated poses and neural radiance field. However, as the pose estimator is trained with only rendered im-ages, the pose estimation is usually biased or inaccurate for real images due to the domain gap between real im-ages and rendered images, leading to poor robustness for the pose estimation of real images and further local min-ima in joint optimization. We design IR-NeRF, an innova-tive pose-free NeRF that introduces implicit pose regular-ization to refine pose estimator with unposed real images and improve the robustness of the pose estimation for real images. With a collection of 2D images of a specific scene,
IR-NeRF constructs a scene codebook that stores scene fea-tures and captures the scene-specific pose distribution im-plicitly as priors. Thus, the robustness of pose estimation can be promoted with the scene priors according to the ra-tionale that a 2D real image can be well reconstructed from the scene codebook only when its estimated pose lies within the pose distribution. Extensive experiments show that IR-NeRF achieves superior novel view synthesis and outper-forms the state-of-the-art consistently across multiple syn-thetic and real datasets. 1.

Introduction
Novel view synthesis has recently achieved remarkable progress, largely driven by the development of neural ra-diance fields (NeRF) [21] that learns 3D scene representa-tions from multi-view 2D images and can generate novel views with superb multi-view consistency. However, most existing works rely heavily on accurate camera poses of the
*Corresponding author, E-mail: shijian.lu@ntu.edu.sg multi-view 2D images which are complicated to collect and not available in many existing image datasets. The cam-era pose constraint can be mitigated by leveraging structure-from-motion (SfM) [14, 26] that allows estimating camera poses from multi-view 2D images. On the other hand, SfM requires keypoint detection and is prone to errors while han-dling objects and scenes with low texture or repeated visual patterns. How to train effective NeRF with unposed multi-view images has become one bottleneck for the wide adop-tion of NeRF in various 3D synthesis tasks.
Several studies attempt pose-free NeRF by training
NeRF with unposed multi-view images. One approach is to train NeRF with certain inaccurate camera poses or prior knowledge about camera pose distributions. For example,
[33] jointly optimizes NeRF and camera poses to alleviate the requirement for accurate camera poses. BARF [18] ex-ploits bundle adjusting to train NeRF with imperfect camera poses. [3] introduces Gaussian activated radiance field that employs Gaussian activation to avoid falling into local min-ima. Nevertheless, this approach still requires reasonable camera pose initialization that is often not easy to obtain.
Another approach does not require any pose information in training. For example, GNeRF [20] first trains coarse NeRF with randomly initialized camera poses and predicts coarse camera poses, and then jointly refines them with the NeRF training process. However, the pose estimator in GNeRF is trained only with images rendered by the coarse NeRF. The pose prediction for real images is biased or inaccurate due to the domain gap between rendered images and real im-ages, leading to poor robustness of pose estimation for real images and local minima [20] while jointly refining NeRF and camera poses.
We propose IR-NeRF, an innovative pose-free NeRF that introduces Implicit Regularization to promote the robust-ness of pose estimator for real images. Specifically, given a set of multi-view images of a scene, a scene codebook is first constructed which stores the scene features and en-codes scene-specific pose distribution implicitly as priors.
With that, a pose-guided view reconstruction scheme is then
Figure 1: Examples of novel view synthesis by GNeRF and our IR-NeRF. The samples are from Synthetic-NeRF [21] and
DTU [16]. It can be observed that the IR-NeRF synthesized novel views have less artifacts and finer details than GNeRF. designed to refine the pose estimator with unposed real im-ages, based on the rationale that a real image can be recon-structed well from the codebook only when its estimated camera pose lies within the scene-specific pose distribution.
With the accurate camera poses predicted by the refined pose estimator, IR-NeRF can jointly optimize NeRF and es-timated camera poses without getting stuck in local minima, yielding accurate NeRF representations with superior novel view synthesis as illustrated in Fig. 1.
The contributions of this work are threefold. First, we propose IR-NeRF, a novel pose-free NeRF that introduces implicit pose regularization that enables effective NeRF training with unposed multi-view images. Second, with a set of multi-view 2D images of a scene, we construct a scene codebook that encodes scene features and implicitly captures scene-specific camera pose distribution as priors.
Third, we design a pose-guided view reconstruction scheme that utilizes the scene priors to refine pose estimator with unposed real images, which allows to promote the robust-ness of the pose estimator. 2.