Abstract
Domain adaptation methods for 2D human pose estima-tion typically require continuous access to the source data during adaptation, which can be challenging due to pri-vacy, memory, or computational constraints. To address this limitation, we focus on the task of source-free domain adaptation for pose estimation, where a source model must adapt to a new target domain using only unlabeled target data. Although recent advances have introduced source-free methods for classification tasks, extending them to the re-gression task of pose estimation is non-trivial. In this paper, we present Prior-guided Self-training (POST), a pseudo-labeling approach that builds on the popular Mean Teacher framework to compensate for the distribution shift. POST leverages prediction-level and feature-level consistency be-tween a student and teacher model against certain image transformations. In the absence of source data, POST uti-lizes a human pose prior that regularizes the adaptation pro-cess by directing the model to generate more accurate and anatomically plausible pose pseudo-labels. Despite being simple and intuitive, our framework can deliver significant performance gains compared to applying the source model directly to the target data, as demonstrated in our extensive experiments and ablation studies. In fact, our approach achieves comparable performance to recent state-of-the-art methods that use source data for adaptation. 1.

Introduction
Human pose estimation is a fundamental task in com-puter vision that involves determining the precise locations of keypoints, such as joints, on a human body in an image or video [1]. The growing need for pose estimation in various applications such as action recognition [2], human-computer interaction [3], and video surveillance [4] has driven the rapid development of highly accurate deep learning tech-* Currently at AWS AI Labs. Work done while the author was at UCR.
Figure 1. Problem setup. Existing UDA methods for pose estima-tion rely on a labeled source dataset while adapting to an unlabeled target dataset. However, privacy concerns surrounding the use of personally identifiable information in these labeled datasets, as well as the significant storage and computational requirements, can limit access to such data. Hence, our work focuses on source-free UDA of pose estimation models. niques. However, the challenge of obtaining large annotated datasets for training, compounded with the susceptibility to a performance decline in the face of data distribution shifts still poses limitations for current pose estimation models.
To overcome these limitations, recent studies have fo-cused on unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) of pose estimators [5, 6]. UDA allows for transferring a pose esti-mation model trained on a source domain, where labeled data is available, to a target domain where labeled data is unavailable. Despite improved and robust pose estimation, the requirement of simultaneous access to both source and target domains during adaptation hinders real-world imple-mentation. For instance, the labeled source data may not be accessible post-deployment due to privacy or proprietary issues. This is particularly relevant for human pose datasets, which contain personally identifiable information (PII) [7].
Furthermore, adaptation using the entire source data might
be infeasible due to both memory and computational con-straints. In light of these issues, we focus on source-free
UDA of human pose estimation models.
Concretely, our objective is to adapt a 2D human pose estimation model to a new target domain utilizing only its trained parameters and unlabeled target data. This presents a major challenge as the absence of source data for regu-larization can cause catastrophic forgetting. While recent advances have introduced methods to tackle this issue in classification tasks [8, 9, 10], extending them to the regres-sion task of pose estimation is non-trivial . To address this challenge, we introduce Prior-guided Self-training (POST), a self-training regression framework that employs a human pose prior to effectively guide the adaptation process in the absence of source data. An overview of our problem setup is shown in Figure 1.
Our approach builds on the Mean Teacher [11] frame-work, which uses consistency in the prediction space of a stu-dent and teacher model to produce trustworthy pseudo-labels and learn from the unlabeled target domain. To achieve this, we create two augmented views of each target image, vary-ing in scale, spatial context, and color statistics. Aligned pose predictions from both models in both views are then obtained, and consistency between the predictions across the different views is encouraged to facilitate prediction space adaptation. However, our empirical results show that relying solely on consistency in the output space is insufficient when supervision from the source data is lacking. To address this, we also introduce feature space adaptation, which aims to encourage consistency across features extracted from the two separate views. We adopt the Barlow Twins [12] ap-proach to accomplish this. Specifically, we seek to make the cross-correlation matrix calculated from a pair of feature embeddings as close to the identity matrix as possible.
In addition to the adaptation across both outputs and fea-tures, we employ a human pose prior that models the full manifold of plausible poses in some high-dimensional pose space to refine possible noisy pseudo-labels that may arise during self-training. The plausible poses are represented as points on the manifold surface, with zero distance from it, while non-plausible poses are located outside the sur-face, with a non-zero distance from it. This manifold is learned using a high-dimensional neural field, similar to
Pose-NDF [13]. The pose prior acts as a strong regularizer, directing the model to generate more accurate pose pseudo-labels on the target data and leading to improved adaptation.
The learning of this prior requires an auxiliary dataset of plausible human poses, but this does not compromise the pri-vacy aspect of our framework as the prior does not make use of RGB images. In addition, it is worth noting that the prior can be trained offline, separately from the adaptation process.
This not only saves computational resources but also reduces the amount of storage required. Compared to storing entire
× less memory. images, it is much more efficient to store pose coordinates, which requires approximately 3000
Main contributions. To summarize, our primary contribu-tions are as follows:
• We address the problem of adapting a human pose estima-tion model to a target domain consisting of unlabeled data, without access to the original source dataset. This ame-liorates the privacy concern associated with the current domain adaptive pose estimation methods.
• We introduce Prior-guided Self-training (POST), a sim-ple source-free unsupervised adaptation algorithm. POST leverages both prediction-level and feature-level consis-tency, in addition to a human pose prior, to drive self-training for improved adaptation to the target domain.
• We evaluate our method qualitatively and quantitatively on three challenging domain adaptive scenarios, demonstrat-ing comparable performance to existing UDA methods that have access to the source data. 2.