Abstract 3D human pose estimation has been a long-standing challenge in computer vision and graphics, where multi-view methods have significantly progressed but are limited by the tedious calibration processes. Existing multi-view methods are restricted to fixed camera pose and therefore lack generalization ability. This paper presents a novel
Probabilistic Triangulation module that can be embedded in a calibrated 3D human pose estimation method, gen-eralizing it to uncalibration scenes. The key idea is to use a probability distribution to model the camera pose and iteratively update the distribution from 2D features instead of using camera pose.
Specifically, We main-tain a camera pose distribution and then iteratively up-date this distribution by computing the posterior proba-bility of the camera pose through Monte Carlo sampling.
This way, the gradients can be directly back-propagated from the 3D pose estimation to the 2D heatmap, en-abling end-to-end training. Extensive experiments on Hu-man3.6M and CMU Panoptic demonstrate that our method outperforms other uncalibration methods and achieves comparable results with state-of-the-art calibration meth-ods. Thus, our method achieves a trade-off between es-timation accuracy and generalizability. Our code is in https://github.com/bymaths/probabilistic triangulation 1.

Introduction 3D human pose estimation is a fundamental tool in many downstream applications of computer vision and computer graphics, such as motion recognition[13], human-computer interaction[23], movie game animation[4], virtual reality[24], etc. The development of these fields requires a more accurate, convenient, and robust 3D human pose esti-mation algorithm.
Recently, RGB-based pose estimation has become the
*Corresponding author trend because of its convenience, wide application sce-narios, and low cost[27]. These methods can be divided single-view and multi-view meth-into two categories: ods. Although single-view methods[39, 37, 11, 38, 25] have more widespread application scenarios, the lack of depth information makes single-view estimation of 3D hu-man pose an ill-posed problem, especially when dealing with occlusions and multi-person scenes[21]. Multi-view methods[18, 16, 36, 33, 2, 14, 31, 20] can achieve more accurate results than single view-based methods because multi-view cameras can restore the depth information as well as the occluded parts.
However, the multi-view approach faces several issues when applied in practice. First, multi-view methods re-quire synchronized and calibrated cameras, which compli-cates the process. Second, existing datasets for multi-view human pose estimation lack the diversity of camera external parameters. This results in the trained model cannot gener-alize well to unseen camera parameters, thus requiring re-annotation and re-training once the camera configurations change.
To alleviate the above issues, we propose Probabilistic
Triangulation module for uncalibrated 3D human pose esti-mation. Our module enables the network to get rid of cam-era pose parameters during the training process, which re-sults in better generalization performance to be applied to wild scenes. The main idea is to use a probability distribu-tion to model the camera pose, making the whole process differentiable. Specifically, we transform the uncalibrated 3D human pose estimation into a nonlinear optimization problem based on the reprojection error. The camera pose distribution is estimated from the 2D pose features, and then the posterior probability of the camera pose is computed by
Monte Carlo sampling to iteratively update this distribution.
We conducted extensive experiments on two benchmark datasets (Human3.6M[17] and CMU Panoptic[19, 29, 35]) to demonstrate that our method outperforms other uncali-brated methods and achieves comparable results with the state-of-the-art calibration methods, which indicates that
our method improves the generalized ability to camera pa-rameters in multi-view human pose estimation while main-taining high accuracy. more information but is not easily bounded explicitly. Our proposed Probabilistic Triangulation is applicable in both representations.
In summary, our contributions are mainly three-fold.
• We propose Probabilistic Triangulation that can gen-eralize the calibrated 3D human pose estimation al-gorithm to uncalibrated scenes to estimate 3D human pose in the absence of camera pose.
• We propose an approximation method for camera pose distribution and an updated distribution method based on Monte Carlo sampling. It is used to model the cam-era pose of uncalibrated scenes with accuracy and ro-bustness beyond classical algorithms.
• We conducted extensive experiments on two bench-mark datasets (Human3.6M and CMU Panoptic) to demonstrate the accuracy, generalization capability, and applicability of Probabilistic Triangulation to wild scenes. 2.