Abstract
Dataset summarisation is a fruitful approach to dataset inspection. However, when applied to a single dataset the discovery of visual concepts is restricted to those most prominent. We argue that a comparative approach can ex-pand upon this paradigm to enable richer forms of dataset inspection that go beyond the most prominent concepts.
To enable dataset comparison we present a module that learns concept-level prototypes across datasets. We lever-age self-supervised learning to discover these prototypes without supervision, and we demonstrate the benefits of our approach in two case-studies. Our findings show that dataset comparison extends dataset inspection and we hope to encourage more works in this direction. Code and us-age instructions available at https://github.com/
Nanne/ProtoSim 1.

Introduction
Image datasets are crucial for Computer Vision and due to the algorithms’ need for more data they are ever growing in size. At the same time datasets are a major source of bias leading to negative social impact [29, 30]. Unfortunately, it is challenging to determine what is contained in a dataset as their large size combined with the visual nature of the data makes manual inspection infeasible. To support users and developers of large-scale datasets in ensuring that the datasets match their usage and design goals it is necessary to develop better tools for dataset inspection.
A promising direction for generic dataset inspection is found in highly effective approaches that have been pro-posed for summarisation [35, 9, 14, 44, 24]. A major benefit of these approaches is that they enable explorative dataset inspection without needing supervised pretraining. How-ever, a limitation of these approaches is that they use fre-quency as a proxy for importance, and on a single dataset therefore only discover those visual concepts which are most prominent. As such, we argue that a comparative ap-proach, which enables discovery of a wider and more di-verse range of concepts, is necessary to effectively perform dataset inspection. For instance, the PASS dataset [1] is de-signed as an ImageNet [32] alternative whilst containing no people, as such it provides us with a testable hypothesis that is comparative in nature. Namely, when comparing these two datasets there should be a disjoint set of visual people-centric concepts that are only found in ImageNet. In a case study we will verify this hypothesis, and demonstrate that dataset comparison can lead to new insights.
Moreover, an additional limitation of existing summari-sation approaches is that they decouple the summarisation process from representation learning, and treat these as two distinct steps by performing the summarisation on a
pre-defined feature basis, such as GIST descriptors in [35] or LDA clusters in [31]. As recent work on incorporat-ing prototypes into a network’s reasoning process has been shown to aid interpretability [23, 6, 33, 13, 45], we propose that this may also be a promising direction for end-to-end dataset comparison. Therefore, we introduce a method for prototype-based dataset comparison, which discovers the visual concepts in a dataset in an end-to-end fashion.
Dataset prototypes are similar to cluster centroids in that they represent latent points in the feature space that are to be discovered. However, in clustering, similar to prior work on dataset summarisation, these centroids are discovered in a step that is decoupled from learning the feature represen-tations. Whilst some recent works have explored forms of deep clustering [40, 11, 22], they still involve two separate optimisation goals. For example, by having one loss fo-cused on the feature representation and another on cluster-ing [11]. Instead, we propose a simple module ProtoSim that can be integrated into a deep network without chang-ing how it is optimised. To demonstrate this, we add Pro-toSim to a Vision Transformer (ViT) [10] and show that it can effectively discover visual concepts across datasets in a self-supervised setting.
Overall, we make the following contributions:
• We introduce dataset comparison, a new approach for inspecting datasets.
• To enable dataset comparison we present ProtoSim, a module for integrated learning of dataset prototypes.
• With two case-studies we demonstrate how dataset into comparison can be used to gain new insight datasets. 2.