Abstract
With sufficient paired training samples, the supervised deep learning methods have attracted much attention in im-age denoising because of their superior performance. How-ever, it is still very challenging to widely utilize the super-vised methods in real cases due to the lack of paired noisy-clean images. Meanwhile, most self-supervised denoising methods are ineffective as well when applied to the real-world denoising tasks because of their strict assumptions in applications. For example, as a typical method for self-supervised denoising, the original blind spot network (BSN) assumes that the noise is pixel-wise independent, which is much different from the real cases. To solve this problem, we propose a novel self-supervised real image denoising frame-work named Sampling Difference As Perturbation (SDAP) based on Random Sub-samples Generation (RSG) with a cyclic sample difference loss. Specifically, we dig deeper into the properties of BSN to make it more suitable for real noise. Surprisingly, we find that adding an appropriate per-turbation to the training images can effectively improve the performance of BSN. Further, we propose that the sampling difference can be considered as perturbation to achieve better results. Finally we propose a new BSN framework in combination with our RSG strategy. The results show that it significantly outperforms other state-of-the-art self-supervised denoising methods on real-world datasets. The code is available at https://github.com/p1y2z3/SDAP. 1.

Introduction
Image denoising is a hot topic in low-level vision tasks, aiming to obtain high-quality images from noisy versions.
In recent years, learning-based methods have been widely used in image denoising with their superior performance.
Thanks to the construction of paired image datasets, the su-pervised approaches [44, 2, 28, 11, 33, 34] can be efficiently implemented. In these approaches, it is a common practice (cid:66)Corresponding Author
Noisy
CBDNet [14]
C2N [18]
CVF-SID [25]
AP-BSN [22]
SDAP (S)(E) (Ours)
Figure 1: Real-world image denoising results on DND [27]. to synthesize paired datasets directly using a specific noise model, such as the signal-independent additive white Gaus-sian noise (AWGN) model.
However, the real images are captured by cameras with image signal processing (ISP) pipelines [4]. The noise is usually signal-dependent and spatially correlated in the real world. Moreover, ISP includes many non-linear operations that can complicate the noise distribution. Due to the in-fluence of ISP pipelines within the camera, the noise distri-bution of real images is difficult to predict. Therefore, it is difficult and challenging for us to model the noise for real images. To overcome the problem of directly and explic-itly modelling noise distribution, paired real-world datasets have been constructed by researchers. However, collecting paired noisy-clean images is difficult and time-expensive.
Recently, a series of unsupervised and self-supervised methods have been introduced. These methods do not re-quire paired datasets for training, and thus further avoid-ing the difficulty of collecting real-world paired datasets for denoising. Among them, Noise2Void [20] proposes
Blind-Spot Network (BSN) that can be trained with only single noisy images. Unfortunately, BSN has strict assump-tions, which can only be applied to pixel-wise independent noise. AP-BSN [22] applies pixel-shuffle downsampling
(PD) strategy [47] to BSN, remove the spatial correlation in the real-world noise, and thus the real image can also meet the conditions for BSN to some extent. However, real noisy datasets usually have relatively limited numbers of samples.
AP-BSN directly adopts the strategy of PD, which can only obtain s2 sub-images for a noisy image (the stride factor of
PD is s). This will inevitably lead to the insufficient sam-ples, and make the training of BSN less effective. There-fore, the optimal performance of BSN cannot be achieved.
We observe that adding some perturbations to the train-ing images can greatly expand the training data, which im-proves the performance of BSN. Further, we consider the samples difference as the perturbation. To obtain more ran-dom perturbations and more sub-samples, we propose ran-dom sub-samples generation (RSG) strategy to break the fixed sampling pattern of PD. Based on this, we propose a new cyclic sampling difference loss for BSN and a new
BSN framework in combination with our RSG strategy. In summary, our contributions include:
• We provide a new idea about adding perturbations to the training data to improve the BSN performance.
Then, we suggest that the sub-samples difference gen-erated by sampling can be considered as perturbations for higher performance.
• We propose a new self-supervised framework for real image denoising with random sub-samples generation and cyclic sampling difference loss.
• Our method performs very favorably against state-of-the-art (SOTA) self-supervised denoising methods on real-world datasets. 2.