Abstract
We show that classifiers trained with random region pro-posals achieve state-of-the-art Open-world Object Detec-tion (OWOD): they can not only maintain the accuracy of the known objects (w/ training labels), but also con-siderably improve the recall of unknown ones (w/o train-ing labels).
Specifically, we propose RandBox, a Fast
R-CNN based architecture trained on random proposals at each training iteration, surpassing existing Faster R-CNN and Transformer based OWOD. Its effectiveness stems from the following two benefits introduced by randomness.
First, as the randomization is independent of the distribu-tion of the limited known objects, the random proposals become the instrumental variable that prevents the train-ing from being confounded by the known objects. Sec-ond, the unbiased training encourages more proposal ex-plorations by using our proposed matching score that does not penalize the random proposals whose predic-tion scores do not match the known objects. On two benchmarks: Pascal-VOC/MS-COCO and LVIS, Rand-Box significantly outperforms the previous state-of-the-art the ablations on ran-in all metrics. We also detail domization and loss designs. Codes are available at https://github.com/scuwyh2000/RandBox. 1.

Introduction
Different objects may share common visual features. For example, the detection of “horse” helps that of “cow” as they are both “four-legged” cattle. Therefore, it is possible to generalize the detector trained from a limited object class inventory to detect visually similar objects whose classes are out of the inventory. As shown in the right column of Figure 1, besides the conventional detection of a close-world object inventory, Open-wolrd Object Detection [23] (OWOD) can detect out-of-inventory objects and label them as ”unknown”.
To exploit the feature transfer from “known” to “un-known”, the training loss of existing OWOD methods [23, 20, 55] has the following break-downs (Figure 1):
Figure 1: The paradigm of (a) closed-world object detec-tion, (b) existing open-world object detection, and (c) our
RandBox that uses random proposals.
Known-FG (foreground): like conventional closed-world detection (Figure 1a), we calculate the matching scores be-tween the predicted region proposal labels and the ground-truth labels of known objects, where the label is a pair of class and bbox (bounding box). In particular, for two-stage detectors like Faster R-CNN [42], the “proposal sampler” and “matching score” are region proposal network and bbox
IoU (intersection over union); for end-to-end detectors like
DETR [9], they are query transformer decoder and bipartite matching score. For the matched proposals, the loss is class cross-entropy Lcls and bbox regression Lreg.
BG (background): for conventional detection, all the mis-matched proposals are considered background, whose loss is only Lcls with the label ”BG”; for OWOD, we only use the mismatched proposals excluding the Unknown-FG pro-posals below.
ulates a Randomized Controlled Experiment (RCT) [8] to learn a causal detector from region features to object labels, by inviting an independent 3rd-party proposal sampler to explore more possible locations of unknown objects. As shown in Figure 2 RandBox, the recall of unknown objects is greatly improved by RandBox, due to the fact that the confidence score change of the proposals from known to unknown is much more separable. We will detail the theory behind RandBox in Section 4. To get a qualitative sense of open-world detection task, see Figures 3.
RandBox is simple yet effective (Section 3.2). For each training image in every iteration, we sample 500 random boxes as proposals from a 4-dimensional Gaussian noise (center x, center y, height, width). For these random boxes, we crop their RoI (region of interest) features from a back-bone feature map, and feed them into a detection head to obtain Lcls and Lreg as in (Figure 1c), where the pro-posed matching score that encourages exploration is de-tailed in Section 3.2. At inference, we remove the random-ness and grid-sample 10,000 boxes per image by 10 scales, 10 shapes, and 100 spatial locations. We use NMS [35] (Non-maximum Suppression) to prune the 10,000 boxes for final detection. Overall, our contributions include:
• Our proposed RandBox is a Fast R-CNN based archi-tecture for OWOD, which leverages random proposals to remove the confounding effect from the known ob-jects, and uses an improved matching score to encour-age proposal exploration.
• By removing the confounding effect, we learn an unbi-ased detector that improves both known and unknown detection accuracy. In particular, we achieve new state-of-the-art results on Pascal-VOC/MS-COCO [29].
• We show that our RandBox detector trained on Pascal-VOC/MS-COCO remains robust when transferring to long-tailed datasets such as LVIS [19]. 2.