Abstract
The dynamics of biomolecules are crucial for our under-standing of their functioning in living systems. However, current 3D imaging techniques, such as cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM), require freezing the sample, which limits the observation of their conformational changes in real time. The innovative liquid-phase electron microscopy (liquid-phase EM) technique allows molecules to be placed in the native liquid environment, providing a unique oppor-tunity to observe their dynamics. In this paper, we propose
TEMPOR, a Temporal Electron MicroscoPy Object Recon-struction algorithm for liquid-phase EM that leverages an implicit neural representation (INR) and a dynamical varia-tional auto-encoder (DVAE) to recover time series of molec-ular structures. We demonstrate its advantages in recover-ing different motion dynamics from two simulated datasets, 7bcq & Cas9. To our knowledge, our work is the first attempt to directly recover 3D structures of a temporally-varying particle from liquid-phase EM movies. It provides a promising new approach for studying molecules’ 3D dy-namics in structural biology. 1.

Introduction
The study of the structures and dynamics of biologi-cal molecules is crucial for understanding their functions and interactions in living systems. Electron microscopy (EM) has become an indispensable tool for providing high-resolution images and 3D structures of biological molecules at the nanoscale level, without the need for crystallization.
Cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM)[23], the Nobel-prize-winning innovation, has played a crucial role in this development. By rapidly freezing the purified sample solu-tion and subsequently reconstructing a 3D scattering poten-tial (i.e. volume) from 104−7 2D projection images taken from various angles, cryo-EM has enabled researchers to
*Corresponding author
Figure 1. Problem definition. Liquid-phase EM reconstruction aims to recover a 3D volume for each frame of its movies. obtain precise structures of complex biomolecules, such as proteins, viruses and ribosomes. This has led to many breakthroughs in structural biology. However, cryo-EM re-quires the sample to be immobilized, which limits its capa-bility to study dynamic processes, such as chemical reac-tions and conformational changes.
Recent advances in liquid-phase EM[17, 38, 40] have opened up new possibilities for studying the dynamic be-havior of biological molecules in real time. By placing liquid-phase EM allows samples in the liquid medium, molecules to move and interact in a natural environment, consequently capturing movies of functional variations in their structures. However, the current liquid-phase EM technique primarily focuses on observing the dynamics of molecules in two dimensions, rather than recovering their 3D structures. A typical liquid-phase EM dataset contains only 103−4 noisy 2D images. Due to the limited number of particles that can be imaged and the temporal evolution of each particle, it is extremely challenging to extract 3D structural information from the liquid-phase EM data.
In this paper, we propose a novel dynamic tomographic reconstruction algorithm for liquid-phase EM (Fig. 1), called TEMPOR (Temporal Electron MicroscoPy Object
Reconstruction). The key insight of this algorithm is that despite liquid-phase EM collecting a much smaller number
of images than cryo-EM, the temporal information in each particle’s movie can provide additional supervision for the volume reconstruction. This algorithm builds upon recent advances in heterogeneous cryo-EM reconstruction[44, 45, 46], and leverages an implicit neural representation (INR) and a dynamical variational auto-encoder (DVAE) to re-cover the time series of a molecule’s 3D structural varia-tions. To our knowledge, our paper is the first work that tries to reconstruct 3D structures of temporally-varying par-ticles directly from liquid-phase EM movies. This has im-portant implications for various areas of research, including precision medicine, molecular biology, and biophysics. 2.