Abstract
Neural implicit surface learning has shown significant progress in multi-view 3D reconstruction, where an object is represented by multilayer perceptrons that provide con-tinuous implicit surface representation and view-dependent radiance. However, current methods often fail to accurately reconstruct reflective surfaces, leading to severe ambiguity.
To overcome this issue, we propose Ref-NeuS, which aims to reduce ambiguity by attenuating the effect of reflective sur-faces. Specifically, we utilize an anomaly detector to esti-mate an explicit reflection score with the guidance of multi-view context to localize reflective surfaces. Afterward, we design a reflection-aware photometric loss that adaptively reduces ambiguity by modeling rendered color as a Gaus-sian distribution, with the reflection score representing the variance. We show that together with a reflection direction-dependent radiance, our model achieves high-quality sur-face reconstruction on reflective surfaces and outperforms the state-of-the-arts by a large margin. Besides, our model is also comparable on general surfaces. 1.

Introduction 3D reconstruction is a crucial task in computer vision that serves as the foundation for multiple fields such as computer-aided design [20, 8], computer animation [32, 22], and virtual reality [39]. Among various 3D reconstruc-tion techniques, image-based 3D reconstruction is particu-larly challenging, which aims to recover 3D structures from posed 2D images. Traditional multi-view stereo (MVS) ap-proaches [11, 38, 50] generally require a multi-step pipeline with supervision, which can be cumbersome. Recently, neural implicit surface learning [44, 51, 30] has gained in-creasing attention due to its ability to achieve remarkable reconstruction quality with a neat formulation that supports end-to-end and unsupervised training. However, as illus-*Corresponding author.
Figure 1. Our ambiguity-reduced framework significantly im-proves explicit surfaces geometry, surface normals and rendering realism for modeling reflective surfaces compared to NeuS and
Ref-NeRF. Reconstruction accuracy (lower is better), surface nor-mal mean angular error, i.e., MAE (lower is better) and PSNR (higher is better) are compared. trated in Fig. 1, existing methods tend to produce erroneous results in reflective surfaces. Since these approaches infer geometry information with multi-view consistency, which is compromised due to the ambiguous surface prediction on reflective surfaces. As a result, their practicality becomes limited in scenarios where reflection is unavoidable.
Several recent works [3, 41, 54, 55, 42] have investigated reflection modeling in neural radiance fields. These meth-ods typically decompose the appearance of an object into several physical components, allowing reflection to be ex-plicitly represented. This can lead to a better estimation of the 3D geometry by eliminating the influence of the reflec-tion component. Nevertheless, physical decomposition can be highly ill-posed [14], and inaccurate decomposition can significantly constrain performance. For example, as shown in Fig. 1, the predicted normals in Ref-NeRF [42] are not accurate enough, which leads to suboptimal performance.
In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective solution that does not rely on challenging physical decomposition.
Instead, we suggest reducing ambiguity by introducing a reflection-aware photometric loss that adaptively lowers the weights fitting reflective surfaces based on the reflection score. By doing so, we avoid devastating multi-view consis-tency. Additionally, inspired by Ref-NeRF [42] and Neural-Warp [7], we show that we can further improve the geome-try by substituting radiance dependency with reflection di-rection to obtain a more accurate radiance fields. As demon-strated in Fig. 1, our model outperforms other competitive approaches in predicting surface geometry (top row) and surface normals (middle row). Besides, by estimating more accurate surface normals that determine the accuracy of re-flection direction, we can also achieve promising rendering realism as an added benefit (bottom row).
Although the idea discussed above is simple, designing the reflection-aware photometric loss is non-trivial. One straightforward approach is to follow the NeRF-W [26], in which the vanilla photometric loss is extended to a Bayesian learning framework [19]. It formulates radiance as a Gaus-sian distribution with the learned uncertainty representing the variance, expecting the uncertainty can localize transient components of an image in the wild and eliminate its influ-ence for static components learning. However, this method is not applicable in reflective scenes, since it learns the im-plicit uncertainty that only considers the information of a single ray and ignores the multi-view context.
To address this issue, we propose defining an explicit reflection score that leverages multi-view context obtained through pixel colors from multi-view images referring to the same surface point. First, we identify the visibility of all source views given a surface point. Next, we project the point to visible images to obtain pixel colors. Based on this, we use an anomaly detector to estimate the reflec-tion score, which serves as the variance. By minimizing the negative log-likelihood of the Gaussian distribution of the color, a large variance attenuates the importance. We further demonstrate that, by using reflection direction-dependent radiance, our model achieves promising results for multi-view reconstruction with a better radiance fields.
To summarize, our contributions are listed as follows.
• To the best of our knowledge, we present the first neural implicit surface learning framework for recon-structing objects with reflective surfaces.
• We propose a simple yet effective approach that en-able neural implicit surface learning to handle reflec-tive surfaces. Our approach can produce high-quality surface geometry and surface normals.
• Extensive experiments on several datasets show that the proposed framework significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on reflective surfaces. 2.