Abstract
Recently, several methods have explored the poten-tial of multi-contrast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) super-resolution (SR) and obtain results superior to single-contrast SR methods. However, existing approaches still have two shortcomings: (1) They can only address fixed in-teger upsampling scales, such as 2×, 3×, and 4×, which require training and storing the corresponding model sep-arately for each upsampling scale in clinic. (2) They lack direct interaction among different windows as they adopt the square window (e.g., 8×8) transformer network archi-tecture, which results in inadequate modelling of longer-range dependencies. Moreover, the relationship between reference images and target images is not fully mined.
To address these issues, we develop a novel network for multi-contrast MRI arbitrary-scale SR, dubbed as McASSR.
Specifically, we design a rectangle-window cross-attention transformer to establish longer-range dependencies in MR images without increasing computational complexity and fully use reference information. Besides, we propose the reference-aware implicit attention as an upsampling mod-ule, achieving arbitrary-scale super-resolution via implicit neural representation, further fusing supplementary infor-mation of the reference image. Extensive and comprehen-sive experiments on both public and clinical datasets show that our McASSR yields superior performance over SOTA methods, demonstrating its great potential to be applied in clinical practice. Code will be available at https:
//github.com/GuangYuanKK/McASSR. 1.

Introduction
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can provide clear information on tissue structure and function by acquir-*Corresponding author.
Figure 1: Visual comparison with SOTA arbitrary-scale SR method LTE [13], the reconstructed SR images by our net-work contain sharper edges, more visual details, and fewer blurring artefacts. ∗ means our implementation that uses
SwinIR [17] as the backbone and concatenates the refer-ence and target image as input. ing high-resolution (HR) magnetic resonance (MR) im-ages, which is a non-invasive, radiation-free clinical imag-ing technique. However, acquiring these HR MR images is time-consuming, and the long acquisition time will cause discomfort to patients and introduce motion artifacts [15, 5].
Image super-resolution (SR) technology is utilized to alle-viate this problem by generating the corresponding HR ver-sion from the low-resolution (LR) images obtained by MRI.
At the early stage, the model-based [27, 23] and learning-based [37, 40] traditional methods are utilized to generate SR images. However, these methods have in-sufficient reconstruction performance under high upsam-pling scale, such as 4×. Recently, some deep learning
methods based on single-contrast for MRI SR reconstruc-tion [22, 29, 31, 2, 24, 26, 32, 41] have been proposed to cope with the limitations of traditional methods and acquire higher-quality MR images. However, the aforementioned single-contrast methods only focus on feature extraction and restoration using single-contrast MR images, ignoring the complementary information in the corresponding other contrast images, which can be utilized to improve the re-construction quality of the images.
MRI can offer multi-contrast images with the same tis-sue and anatomical structure by setting different scanning parameters. Therefore, using reference HR images of one contrast with a shorter acquisition time (e.g., T1 and PD) to complement target LR images of another contrast with a longer scan time (e.g., T2 and FS-PD) is a promising method. Several multi-contrast approaches [21, 4, 14, 16, 39, 44] have been proposed to utilize the reference images for multi-contrast MRI SR and obtain better results than single-contrast methods. Nevertheless, these methods still have the following shortcomings that restrict their applica-tion in clinic. Limitation 1: They can only address fixed integer upsampling scales, such as 2×, 3×, and 4×, and cannot directly perform arbitrary-scale upsampling. More-over, each fixed integer scale requires training and storing the corresponding deep neural network model separately, which seriously hinders the application in the medical field.
Limitation 2: They lack direct interaction among different windows since they employ the square window (e.g., 8×8) transformer network architecture, which results in inade-quate modelling of longer-range dependencies. Moreover, the relationship between reference images and target im-ages is not fully mined. Intuitively, for knee and brain MR images, the vertical/horizontal rectangular window (e.g., 4×16/16×4) can effectively establish longer-range depen-dencies and capture more similar features to accelerate the increase of receptive fields.
To cope with the above shortcomings, in this paper, we propose a novel and effective network for multi-contrast
MRI arbitrary-scale SR. we call it McASSR. First, we de-sign a rectangle-window cross-attention transformer as the feature extraction backbone. Specifically, it employs hori-zontal and vertical rectangle window cross-attention in dif-ferent heads parallelly to expand the attention area, aggre-gate the features among different windows, and cross-fuse the complementary information of the reference and target images. Second, inspired by implicit neural representation (INR) [1], we propose the reference-aware implicit atten-tion as an upsampling module, which achieves arbitrary-scale super-resolution and further fuses complementary in-formation of the reference and target images. Our contribu-tions can be summarized as follows: (1) We propose a novel network for multi-contrast MRI arbitrary-scale SR, named as McASSR. To the best of our knowledge, our study is the first one to achieve arbitrary-scale upsampling in multi-contrast MRI tasks. (2) The rectangle-window cross-attention transformer is designed to increase the receptive field, which can ef-fectively establish the longer-range dependencies to fully use reference information without increasing computational complexity. (3) The reference-aware implicit attention is proposed to realize multi-contrast MRI arbitrary-scale SR via INR and improve the quality of the reconstruction images by utiliz-ing supplementary information from the reference images. (4) Our McASSR outperforms SOTA approaches on four benchmark datasets (FastMRI, BraTs, healthy Brain, tumor
Brain), demonstrating its effectiveness and tremendous po-tential to be used in clinical practice. 2.