Abstract 1.

Introduction
Palmprint recently shows great potential in recognition applications as it is a privacy-friendly and stable biomet-ric. However, the lack of large-scale public palmprint datasets limits further research and development of palm-print recognition. In this paper, we propose a novel real-istic pseudo-palmprint generation (RPG) model to synthe-size palmprints with massive identities. We ﬁrst introduce a conditional modulation generator to improve the intra-class diversity. Then an identity-aware loss is proposed to ensure identity consistency against unpaired training. We further improve the B´ezier palm creases generation strategy to guarantee identity independence. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that synthetic pretraining signiﬁcantly boosts the recognition model performance. For example, our model improves the state-of-the-art B´ezierPalm by more than 5% and 14% in terms of TAR@FAR=1e-6 under the 1 : 1 and 1 : 3 Open-set protocol. When accessing only 10% of the real training data, our method still outperforms
ArcFace with 100% real training data, indicating that we are closer to real-data-free palmprint recognition.
∗Equal contribution.
†Corresponding authors.
Palmprint is an excellent biometric in terms of privacy, willingness, convenience, and security. Since the palmprint locates on the inner side of the palm, obtaining the palm-print without one’s permission is nearly impossible, which is more privacy-friendliness over the face. Compared to iris and ﬁngerprints, palmprint has fewer usage restrictions, which makes palmprint more user-friendly. Furthermore,
Palmprints and palm veins can be collected simultaneously to form a highly secure dual-modal system.
Due to these advantages, big companies such as Ama-zon [1] and Tencent [69] begin to apply palmprint recogni-tion in their payment services. However, for the same rea-son, palmprints are rare in public and expensive to collect.
To our best knowledge, publicly available datasets [2, 21, 29, 30, 36, 41, 52, 57, 68] only contain thousands of iden-tities and tens of thousands of images in total. Meanwhile, face recognition has several million-level publicly available datasets [4, 9, 27, 38, 44, 62] that contain tens to hundreds of thousands of identities. The lack of large-scale public dataset seriously inhibits the research on palmprint recogni-tion.
To solve this problem, one way is to collect a large-scale palmprint dataset. However, this way is very time-generation (RPG) model. As shown in Fig.1, the RPG model takes synthetic B´ezier palm creases as an identity (ID) condition and outputs realistic pseudo-palmprints with a bidirectional mapping from the Gaussian noise domain to the palmprints domain. Since there is no correspondence between synthetic B´ezier palm creases and real palmprints, the generation model can only use unpaired data and will lose intra-class identity consistency easily during training.
To solve this problem, we introduce an identity-aware loss that restrains the identity consistency between palmprints generated from the same B´ezier palm creases. In addition, we design a conditional modulation generator to generate diversiﬁed intra-class textures and lighting conditions us-ing a latent control vector encoded from random noises. To further reduce the distribution gap between synthetic palm creases and real-world palmprints, we reﬁned the synthetic palmprint creases generation strategy with a more reason-able parameter design and identity independence check.
The contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We propose a realistic pseudo-palmprint generation (RPG) model with a conditional modulation genera-tor to improve the intra-class diversity and an ID-aware loss to help the RPG model ensure identity consistency under unpaired training.
• We improve the B´ezier palm creases synthetic method to get more reasonable palm creases and independent identities.
• Extensive experimental results on 13 public datasets demonstrate that recognition models pretrained with our synthetic pseudo-palmprints achieve state-of-the-art recognition accuracy.
• With our RPG pretraining, even if accessing only 10% of the real data, the recognition model performance still outperforms 100% real data direct training. Show-ing we are closer to real-data-free palmprint recogni-tion. 2.