Abstract
Tampered
Gt
Mantra-Net
SPAN
MVSS-Net
PSCC-Net
Ours
Since image editing methods in real world scenarios cannot be exhausted, generalization is a core challenge for image manipulation detection, which could be severely
In this paper weakened by semantically related features. we propose SAFL-Net, which constrains a feature extrac-tor to learn semantic-agnostic features by designing spe-ciﬁc modules with corresponding auxiliary tasks. Applying constraints directly to the features extracted by the encoder helps it learn semantic-agnostic manipulation trace fea-tures, which prevents the biases related to semantic infor-mation within the limited training data and improves gener-alization capabilities. The consistency of auxiliary bound-ary prediction task and original region prediction task is guaranteed by a feature transformation structure. Experi-ments on various public datasets and comparisons in mul-tiple dimensions demonstrate that SAFL-Net is effective for image manipulation detection. 1.

Introduction
The proliferation of novel image editing techniques has greatly enriched our visual world. However, these tech-niques have also brought signiﬁcant challenges to the au-thenticity and security of graphic media content. To ad-dress these issues, image manipulation detection methods have been proposed to identify the speciﬁc regions that have been modiﬁed. These techniques are crucial for enabling us to distinguish between virtual and authentic components of rich multimedia content.
The majority of tampering operations take place in re-gions that exhibit strong correlations with semantic proper-*Corresponding author.
Figure 1. Some cases of the phenomenon exhibit methods encoun-tering noticeable semantic-related false alarms, as indicated by the green boxes. Additionally, there are instances of signiﬁcant missed detection, as denoted by the red boxes. ties. However, the limited and biased nature of the available training data means that this correlation is insufﬁcient to accurately represent the distribution of real-world scenes.
For example, a dataset where tampered areas are concen-trated in human regions can cause the detection model to display signiﬁcant semantic association, leading to incor-rect predictions, as illustrated by the regions marked with a green box in Figure 1. Consequently, this semantic corre-lation can impact the learning of tampering trace features, even though it may improve the model’s ﬁt to the training data. When detecting tampering in an unseen scene, it is es-sential to identify evidence of tampering rather than rely on the probabilistic semantic distribution inherent in this con-strained training data. Therefore, the most critical issue for generalization is to learn semantic-agnostic features.
To enhance the generalization ability of semantic-agnostic tampering trace features, existing methods have focused on restricting the semantic information of the in-put by utilizing hand-crafted feature extraction modules
[14, 26, 25, 10, 13], or by removing the guidance of seman-tic masks through the conversion of the task and changing the structure of the segmentation network [19, 28, 2, 22].
Benchmark Semantic 
Representation Pipeline reference (cid:1832)(cid:3046)(cid:3032)
Semantic 
Suppression 
Module (cid:2278)(cid:3020)(cid:3020)(cid:3014) (cid:4666)(cid:2278)(cid:3030)(cid:3042)(cid:3041)(cid:3046), (cid:2278)(cid:3030)(cid:3042)(cid:3041)(cid:3047)(cid:4667) (cid:1850)aut (cid:1859)
Encoder efficientnet-b7 (cid:1850)
Classification
Head
Authentic
Tampered (cid:2278)(cid:3030)(cid:3039)(cid:3046)
Baseline
Decoder
Unet-architecture
Segmentation
Head (cid:2278)(cid:3046)(cid:3032)(cid:3034) (cid:4666)(cid:1832)(cid:3047)(cid:3045)(cid:3036) (cid:4667)
Boundary 
Guidance 
Module (cid:2278)(cid:3003)(cid:3008)(cid:3014)
Figure 2. An overview of SAFL-Net. Based on baseline, the plug-and-play SSM and BGM achieve semantic-agnostic feature learning.
The effective extraction of speciﬁc features enables the con-version of the RGB space, which contains rich semantic content, into an underlying noise space or high-frequency space that is unrelated to semantics. However, the absolute noise and high-frequency information are easily erased or changed by post-processing operations, such as compres-sion and blurring, and much available knowledge is also re-moved. Redesigning the network structure and converting the task can break the semantic segmentation supervision.
However, when the auxiliary task conﬂicts with the original task, balancing the two tasks becomes a difﬁcult problem.
In contrast, we propose a method that constrains the fea-ture extractor to learn semantic-agnostic features through modular auxiliary tasks, based on the common feature ex-traction network without any modiﬁcation as the backbone.
We directly restrict semantic information in the features with the assistance of benchmark semantic representation.
Additionally, we leverage boundary supervision to identify inconsistencies in the features around the tampered bound-ary, and design a feature conversion structure to ensure the coherence of the auxiliary task and the primary task. We have conducted experiments on several widely used im-age tampering datasets, namely CASIA [5], Columbia [20],
Coverage [24], NIST16 [7], and IMD20 [18]. Our results demonstrate that SAFL-Net outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods for tampering detection and localization.
We contributes to the following key aspects:
• We propose SAFL-Net, a network with two auxiliary plugins for image manipulation detection and localiza-tion shown in Figure 2.
• We introduce plug-and-play Semantic Suppression
Module and Boundary Guidance Module to directly constrain the feature extractor to learn semantic-agnostic feature.
• We conduct extensive experiments on various bench-marks which demonstrate that SAFL-Net achieves state-of-the-art tampering detection performance. 2.