Abstract
Robust 3D perception under corruption has become an essential task for the realm of 3D vision. While current data augmentation techniques usually perform random transfor-mations on all point cloud objects in an ofﬂine way and ignore the structure of the samples, resulting in over-or-under enhancement.
In this work, we propose an alter-native to make sample-adaptive transformations based on the structure of the sample to cope with potential corrup-tion via an auto-augmentation framework, named as Adapt-Point. Specially, we leverage a imitator, consisting of a
Deformation Controller and a Mask Controller, respec-tively in charge of predicting deformation parameters and producing a per-point mask, based on the intrinsic struc-tural information of the input point cloud, and then con-duct corruption simulations on top. Then a discriminator is utilized to prevent the generation of excessive corrup-In tion that deviates from the original data distribution. addition, a perception-guidance feedback mechanism is in-corporated to guide the generation of samples with appro-priate difﬁculty level. Furthermore, to address the paucity of real-world corrupted point cloud, we also introduce a new dataset ScanObjectNN-C, that exhibits greater simi-larity to actual data in real-world environments, especially when contrasted with preceding CAD datasets. Experi-ments show that our method achieves state-of-the-art results on multiple corruption benchmarks, including ModelNet-C, our ScanObjectNN-C, and ShapeNet-C. 1.

Introduction 3D vision has gained attention for its potential applica-tions in robotics and autonomous driving. Existing meth-ods [14, 15, 22, 16] primarily focused on clean data [26, 1] with few corruptions, whereas practical applications often entail numerous corruptions. Consequently, these models exhibit poor performance in such scenarios. As such, im-†Correspondence to: Jianan Li and Tingfa Xu.
Discriminator
Guidance
Imitator
Classifier
Input 
Sample
Augmented
Sample
Feedback
Figure 1. Workﬂow of AdaptPoint. The AdaptPoint framework involves a co-evolving strategy where the imitator, discriminator, and point cloud classiﬁer are jointly trained. During the training process, the imitator is trained to transform clean data into real-istic corruptions while receiving feedback and guidance from the classiﬁer and discriminator, respectively. proving the robustness of point cloud models against cor-ruption remains a crucial but challenging problem.
To enhance the model’s resistance to corruption, a fre-quently employed technique in prior studies is data augmen-tation [7, 9, 18]. Despite their effectiveness, these methods are subject to two common limitations. Firstly, these ofﬂine methods fail to consider the structure of the classiﬁer, which may lead to the generation of samples that are not beneﬁ-cial for enhancing model robustness. Additionally, they of-ten overlook intrinsic features of the data and apply random transformations to all samples, resulting in augmentations that are either overly difﬁcult or overly simplistic.
To tackle the issues at hand, we introduce a new auto-augmentation framework, AdaptPoint, that is speciﬁcally tailored to generate augmented samples that consider the inherent structure of input point cloud. At the heart of our proposed method lies the sample-adaptive imitator network, which is designed to generate point cloud that are represen-tative of real-world scenarios. It ﬁrst extracts local geomet-ric features from the input point cloud, resulting in a subset of points that encode these features. Subsequently, the imi-tator network is divided into two branches, namely the De-formation Controller and the Mask Controller. The for-mer module, is tasked with modifying the point cloud struc-ture by incorporating the interactions between local regions and predicting the deformation parameters for speciﬁc local areas. On the other hand, the Mask Controller, is responsi-ble for selectively removing certain points by leveraging the overall structural information of the point cloud and gener-ating a per-point mask. Finally, the deformation and mask parameters are fed into a corruption simulator to generate a corrupted point cloud. The design of the deformation and mask mechanisms endows the imitator with the ability to simulate most real-world corruptions.
The sample-adaptive imitator designed has an impres-sive capability to generate samples that closely resemble real-world corruptions. The following problem to be con-sidered is how to provide sufﬁcient guidance to the imitator network to ensure: i) the generated samples conform to the real point cloud distribution; and ii) generating the samples with appropriate difﬁculty for classiﬁer training. To achieve these objectives, we introduce a discriminator and a classi-ﬁer. The discriminator is used to distinguish between the distributions of clean and augmented samples, thereby pre-venting the generation of excessive corruption that deviates from the original data distribution. On the other hand, the classiﬁer is employed to provide classiﬁcation error feed-back to guide the imitator network in generating samples with an appropriate level of difﬁculty. These three key com-ponents are integrated into the proposed AdaptPoint frame-work, as illustrated in Fig. 1. By jointly optimizing the im-itator with a point cloud discriminator and classiﬁer, our framework progressively generates corrupted data, thereby enhancing the model’s robustness against corruption.
Current datasets for point cloud corruption evalua-tion [18, 17] are largely limited to CAD models, which fail to capture the variety of real-world corruptions encountered in practice and may hinder research progress in point cloud robustness. To bridge this gap, we present a new point cloud corruption dataset, namely ScanObjectNN-C, which is cu-rated by collecting real-world point clouds from ScanOb-jectNN [20] dataset, along with corresponding annotations and ﬁve types of corruptions: “Jitter”,“Drop Global/Local”,
“Add Global/Local”, “Scale”, and “Rotate” [18].
The effectiveness of AdaptPoint is validated through extensive experimentation on diverse datasets such as
ModelNet-C [18], ShapeNet-C[17], and our more challeng-ing ScanObjectNN-C. Our proposed AdaptPoint achieves state-of-the-art results on these datasets, indicating its ca-pability to alleviate the negative inﬂuence of data corrup-tions on point cloud perception performance. Furthermore, our method achieves competitive results in defending point cloud attacks, indicating its generality and effectiveness in handling different types of corruption scenarios.
The main contributions of our work are as follows:
• We present a new auto-augmentation framework,
AdaptPoint, which is tailored for point cloud recog-nition in the presence of real-world corruptions.
• We propose a novel sample-adaptive imitator network that can simulate various types of realistic corruptions by leveraging the intrinsic characteristics of input.
• We construct a real-world point cloud corruption dataset ScanObjectNN-C, which can facilitate research on real-world point cloud corruption.
• We establish new state-of-the-art results on several corruption benchmarks. 2.