Abstract
Real-world single image denoising is crucial and practi-cal in computer vision. Bayesian inversions combined with score priors now have proven effective for single image de-noising but are limited to white Gaussian noise. Moreover, applying existing score-based methods for real-world de-noising requires not only the explicit train of score priors on the target domain but also the careful design of sampling procedures for posterior inference, which is complicated and impractical. To address these limitations, we propose a score priors-guided deep variational inference, namely
ScoreDVI, for practical real-world denoising. By consid-ering the deep variational image posterior with a Gaussian form, score priors are extracted based on easily accessi-ble minimum MSE Non-i.i.d Gaussian denoisers and varia-tional samples, which in turn facilitate optimizing the varia-tional image posterior. Such a procedure adaptively applies cheap score priors to denoising. Additionally, we exploit a Non-i.i.d Gaussian mixture model and variational noise posterior to model the real-world noise. This scheme also enables the pixel-wise fusion of multiple image priors and variational image posteriors. Besides, we develop a noise-aware prior assignment strategy that dynamically adjusts the weight of image priors in the optimization. Our method outperforms other single image-based real-world denoising methods and achieves comparable performance to dataset-based unsupervised methods. 1.

Introduction
Image denoising is a fundamental task in low-level com-puter vision. Different from the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) that has been widely studied, real-world noise is typically signal-dependent and spatially correlated (or structured) and is prevalent in various image process-ing applications, including photography with sRGB noise
[24, 29] and bioimaging with microscopy image noise [44].
*Corresponding author.
The removal of real-world structured noise is therefore crit-ical for the subsequent image analysis and understanding.
While recent deep learning-based supervised methods
[62, 31, 60, 6] and unsupervised/self-supervised methods
[40, 29, 66, 24] have shown promising results on real-world image denoising, they suffer from data collection difficul-ties and model generalization issues [65]. As an alternative, single image-based real-world denoising methods that rely on only a single image are gaining increasing attention as a more practical and promising solution. However, existing single image-based methods, e.g., [55, 4, 45, 67, 5, 65, 30], show unsatisfactory performance in real-world structured noise removal, which highlights the need for new and ef-fective approaches.
Nowadays, deep generative models, represented by score-based methods [52, 15], have enabled powerful im-age priors to be learned from large-scale clean datasets. The learned score priors from score networks have demonstrated remarkable capacity in image generation and various image restorations [21, 52, 51, 47]. However, current score-based methods related to denoising, e.g., [17, 23, 21, 22, 13, 9], typically consider AWGN and cannot handle real-world noise. Furthermore, applying current score-based meth-ods for real-world denoising not only requires the explicit train of score priors on the target domain but also has to devise sampling procedures elaborately for posterior infer-ence. The accurate noise distribution is also demanded in the conditional sampling. Above restrictions makes them cumbersome and impractical for real-world noise removal.
To address these limitations, we propose an effective and practical score priors guided deep variational inference, namely ScoreDVI, for unsupervised real-world single im-age denoising. Rather than explicitly training score priors on the target domain, we relate the general score functions to the easily available minimum MSE (MMSE) Non-i.i.d
Gaussian denoisers. We extract score priors by employing well-trained Non-i.i.d Gaussian denoisers to denoise sam-ples from the variational image posterior paramterized by deep neural networks and then use the extracted scores to fa-cilitate optimizing this variational image posterior, which in
turn allows adaptive extraction of scores in the next round.
This optimization procedure adaptively applies cheap score priors to denoising and frees the elaborate design of sam-pling strategies.
Instead of relying on the accurate noise model, we adopt the Non-i.i.d Gaussian mixture model (GMM) to roughly represent real-world noise, and a variational noise posterior is built and optimized to improve the modeling accuracy by means of hieratical Bayesian inference. This modeling strategy also allows for the pixel-wise fusion of multiple im-age priors and variational image posteriors, further enhanc-ing the denoising capability. Moreover, traditional varia-tional inference treats image priors and likelihoods equally during optimization, which may not be optimal for inputs with varying levels of noise. Since noisier images require more priors, we propose a noise-aware prior assignment strategy that dynamically assigns different weights of im-age priors during optimization based on the estimated noise levels of noisy images. By doing so, our method can maxi-mize performance in individual instances.
In total, our contributions are summarized as follows: 1. We propose an adaptive extraction and utilization of score priors based on Non-i.i.d Gaussian denoisers and deep variational inference for variational optimization. 2. We incoperate Non-i.i.d GMM likelihood model and the variational noise posterior to model the real-world noise, which enables pixel-wise fusion of multiple im-age priors and variational image posteriors. 3. We develop a noise-aware prior assignment strategy, which adaptively assigns the degree of image priors to the optimization objective for different noisy images. 4. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to suc-cessfully remove real-world structured noise by ap-plying score priors. Our method outperforms other single image-based methods on a variety of bench-mark datasets and achieves competitive results against dataset-based unsupervised methods. 2.