Abstract
“Search for” or “Navigate to”? When we find a spe-cific object in an unknown environment, the two choices al-ways arise in our subconscious mind. Before we see the target, we search for the target based on prior experience.
Once we have seen the target, we can navigate to it by re-membering the target location. However, recent object nav-igation methods consider using object association mostly to enhance the “search for” phase while neglecting the im-portance of the “navigate to” phase. Therefore, this paper proposes a dual adaptive thinking (DAT) method that flexi-bly adjusts thinking strategies in different navigation stages.
Dual thinking includes both search thinking according to the object association ability and navigation thinking ac-cording to the target location ability. To make navigation thinking more effective, we design a target-oriented memory graph (TOMG) (which stores historical target information) and a target-aware multi-scale aggregator (TAMSA) (which encodes the relative position of the target). We assess our methods based on the AI2-Thor and RoboTHOR datasets.
Compared with state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods, our ap-proach significantly raises the overall success rate (SR) and success weighted by path length (SPL) while enhancing the agent’s performance in the “navigate to” phase. 1.

Introduction
Object navigation [27, 20, 23, 40] is a challenging task that requires an agent to find a target object in an unknown environment with first-person visual observations. Some researchers [29, 13, 17] recently introduced scene prior knowledge into end-to-end navigation networks. These methods have been applied to address various issues, in-cluding object associations [37], object attention bias [5], and the lack of universal knowledge [14]. However, these
*Corresponding author methods improve the efficiency of only the “search for” phase (start→the target is first seen) while neglecting the
“navigate to” phase (the target is first seen→end). Our ex-periments show that for the current SOTA end-to-end meth-ods, the “navigate to” steps account for 62.75% of the whole path, while only 45.78% for humans; the success rate after seeing the target is only 81.09%, while humans can reach 99.92%. Therefore, the primary issue with current end-to-end object navigation techniques is the low navigation effi-ciency in the “navigate to” phase.
Some modular approaches [4, 30] model the environ-ment by using top-down semantic maps [28, 32]. With the help of detailed semantic maps, the object navigation task can be decoupled into two training subtasks: predicting the subtarget point and navigating to the subtarget point, thus optimizing the agent navigation ability after seeing the tar-get. However, these methods depend strongly on semantic maps, which are hypersensitive to sensory noise and scene changes. Furthermore, generating high-quality semantic maps requires considerable computational resources.
To address the above issues, we aim to integrate this task decoupling concept in modular methods into end-to-end methods. Therefore, we propose the dual adaptive thinking (DAT) method. As shown in Figure 1, the agent’s think-ing modes are divided into search thinking and navigation thinking. Search thinking guides the agent to quickly lo-cate the target according to prior knowledge. Navigation thinking assists the agent in efficiently navigating to the tar-get position after locating the target. The agent adaptively adjusts the dominance of the two thinking methods in an end-to-end network according to the navigation progress.
Specifically, we develop different designs for the search thinking network and navigation thinking network. For the search thinking network, we adapt the directed object atten-tion (DOA) graph method proposed in [5] to design object association and attention allocation strategies. For the navi-gation thinking network, we propose a target-oriented mem-ory graph (TOMG) to store the simplified agent state and
2.