Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of three-dimensional (3D) human mesh estimation in complex poses and oc-cluded situations.
Although many improvements have been made in 3D human mesh estimation using the two-dimensional (2D) pose with occlusion between humans, occlusion from complex poses and other objects remains a consistent problem. Therefore, we propose the novel
Skinned Multi-Person Linear (SMPL) Edge Feature Dis-tillation (SEFD) that demonstrates robustness to complex poses and occlusions, without increasing the number of pa-rameters compared to the baseline model. The model gen-erates an SMPL overlapping edge similar to the ground truth that contains target person boundary and occlusion information, performing subsequent feature distillation in a simple edge map. We also perform experiments on var-ious benchmarks and exhibit fidelity both qualitatively and quantitatively. Extensive experiments prove that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art method by 2.8% in MPJPE and 1.9% in MPVPE on a benchmark 3DPW dataset in the presence of domain gap. Also, our method is superior in 3DPW-OCC, 3DPW-PC, RH-Dataset, OCHuman, Crowd-Pose, and LSP dataset in which occlusion, complex pose, and domain gap exist. The code and occlusion & complex pose annotation will be available at https://github. com/YangChangHee/ICCV2023_SEFD_RELEASE/. 1.

Introduction
Human mesh estimation, which has been used recently in various applications such as digital human and action recognition, targets to generate a 3D mesh by estimating 3D semantic human joints and human mesh vertex locations from 2D input images. However, directly estimating 3D mesh information from input 2D images poses a significant
*These authors contributed equally to this work
†Corresponding author challenge due to the ambiguity in estimating body part ex-act locations. Especially in complex pose cases (e.g., yoga, crouching, twist) or those where occlusion between humans occur, the performance deteriorates. To address these prob-lems, recent studies [1, 3] employ additional information predicted by 2D pose detectors. Specifically, Choi et al.
[1] illustrated the problem of global average pooling and utilized 2D pose information that includes the target per-son in the feature map as a resolution. Khirodkar et al.
[3] proposed the center map, modularized in the encoder, as well as two losses specifically, the interpenetration loss and depth ordering loss to solve the occlusion between hu-mans. These studies have improved 3D mesh estimation ac-curacy by incorporating the prior 2D pose knowledge, but they still struggle with occlusions and complex poses in the wild datasets containing a large domain gap.
First, a problem with the baseline 3D mesh (3DCrowd-Net [1]) is that it cannot be properly extracted as in Figs. 1 (a) and (b). The 2D pose for each image is estimated prop-erly, but the 3D mesh estimate is inaccurate. Therefore, ad-ditional structural information is essential to estimate com-plex poses. Second, if an object is occluded by other people or objects, the 3D mesh estimation accuracy decreases. In
Figs. 1 (c) and (d), the baseline model cannot estimate an appropriate mesh due to severe occlusion, necessitating ad-ditional guidance on occlusion.
To avoid ambiguioty, we define ”complex pose” as cases which the movement of a joint is large. More specifically, a pose in which a joint exceeds its Range of Motion (ROM)
[2] with a margin as shown in Fig. 2. ROM denotes the extent or limit to which a part of the body can move around a joint or a fixed point; the totality of capable movements of a joint.
This paper proposes a novel methodology, SMPL Edge
Feature Distillation (SEFD) which can solve occlusion and complex poses as limitations of 3D pose estimation. To this end, Fig. 3 displays a novel SMPL overlapping edge serving as a ground-truth (GT) edge map. To exploit this
Figure 1. Qualitative comparison of the baseline [1] and the proposed feature distillation SMPL overlapping edge. (a) and (b) show complex poses and (c) and (d) shows occluded situations.
Figure 2. Chart images from evaluation chart DSHS 13-585A (REV. 03/2014) [2] and results with single exceeding ROM. Com-pared to the baseline method, ours showed improved performance under such lateral (flexion), hip (flexion), and Knee (flexion).
SMPL overlapping edge under real-world conditions where
GT does not exist, we utilize another edge extracted by the simple edge detector. Thereafter, feature distillation pro-duces a simple edge map to reduce the difference between the edges extracted by the simple edge detector and the
SMPL overlapping edges. Conventional knowledge distil-lation methods for human poses aim to lighten student mod-els [4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. Our feature distillation aims to distill the ground-truth feature representations of the teacher model to the student model solving the real-environment condition without ground-truth. We propose a new approach robust to occlusion and complex poses while account for struc-tural information in 3D mesh estimation. Our contribution is summarized as follows:
• We designed the SMPL overlapping edge generation, which contains occlusion information while being ro-bust to complex poses. The superiority of the proposed method persists through several experiments. We pro-vide the preconfigured occlusion & complex pose an-notation and codes to support SMPL overlapping edge generation.
• To efficiently utilize the SMPL overlapping edge un-der real-world conditions where GT does not exist, we propose a novel method, SMPL edge feature distilla-tion (SEFD), where simple edge map is distilled to re-duce the difference between the simple edge and the
SMPL overlapping edge.
• Extensive studies demonstrate that the proposed method is the most effective for complex poses and oc-clusion on various public datasets outperforming pre-vious state-of-the-arts methods. 2.