Abstract
In this paper we address the task of finding representa-tive subsets of points in a 3D point cloud by means of a point-wise ordering. Only a few works have tried to ad-dress this challenging vision problem, all with the help of hard to obtain point and cloud labels. Different from these works, we introduce the task of point-wise ordering in 3D point clouds through self-supervision, which we call self-ordering. We further contribute the first end-to-end train-able network that learns a point-wise ordering in a self-supervised fashion. It utilizes a novel differentiable point scoring-sorting strategy and it constructs an hierarchical contrastive scheme to obtain self-supervision signals. We extensively ablate the method and show its scalability and superior performance even compared to supervised order-ing methods on multiple datasets and tasks including zero-shot ordering of point clouds from unseen categories. 1.

Introduction
The goal of this paper is to order the points in a 3D point cloud, so as to enable compute-, memory- and communication-efficient deployment. This is relevant for autonomous driving [11, 44], scene understanding [4, 29], and virtual reality [42, 16], to name just three of the many applications. The key problem of this modality of data is the sheer dimensionality of the input: while each point is usually only 3-dimensional, the number of points per scene or object can easily range from thousands to even millions [13, 43]. As even the original data often contains highly redundant points, methods have been employed to reduce the number of points for particular tasks to a more manageable size. These include simple heuristics such as picking random points [31] or selecting the ones with large
Euclidean distances [24, 30, 32]. More recently, methods have been proposed that order points based on their im-portance [46, 14, 22]. For example, Lang et al. [22] uti-lize a supervised network to optimize for smaller subsets of
*Equal last authors.
Figure 1: Self-supervised learning to order point clouds.
We develop the first self-supervised method to order 3D points in terms of their importance. By utilizing a novel
Point Scorer and differentiable Point Sorter module, we leverage a hierarchical contrastive loss for training to out-put a point-wise ordering without the need for any labels.
This can be used to select subsets that not only outperform previous heuristic methods but even the current, supervised, state of the art on downstream tasks. point clouds that can still yield good performance on vari-ous tasks. However, this method requires supervised anno-tations in the form of labels, which carry with it two main disadvantages. First, is the limited scalability – as obtaining human-annotations, as well as developing a systematic an-notation scheme – is expensive. Second, labelling data cap-tured in-the-wild (such as from a vehicle-mounted LiDAR sensor) is highly ambiguous if there is more than one object present: given a point cloud with 10K points, finding which one belongs to the street, a car, or another car is both diffi-cult and tedious. To avoid the label-dependency of existing work, we propose in this paper the first self-supervised point cloud sorter (see Figure 1).
For self-supervised learning in the image domain, tech-niques such as clustering [6, 3] and contrastive learn-ing [40, 19, 8] have recently shown great potential in learn-ing generalizeable representations by designing suitable un-supervised loss functions. However, these methods are not directly applicable to the problem of point ordering due to two main differences. First, compared to the image domain, our goal is not representation learning per-se, but rather to leverage an unsupervised training signal for finding a re-duced set of points that are representative for many down-stream applications.
Indeed, the difficulty lies in design-ing an effective module that can conduct the ordering – the key trainable component in our method – in a differentiable manner. Finally, in particular for contrastive learning, the generation of positive pairs is of key importance. While in the image domain this is trivially accomplished with aug-mentations, for point clouds this is generally difficult [9] and further complicated for the important case of having a very low number of points.
In this paper, we address these two challenges by order-ing points in a 3D point cloud in a self-supervised manner – a setting we call self-ordering. The first challenge we address by front-loading a novel differentiable point scor-ing and sorting module that produces subsets, for which the self-supervised loss is then used for tuning. The sec-ond challenge we solve by naturally setting different strict subsets of particular point clouds as positive pairs – a choice that arises naturally and leads to a simple but novel hierar-chical contrastive loss. As the first to tackle this setting in an unsupervised manner, we show that our method can not only produce good orderings of points, but even outperform supervised methods, when evaluated on a range of down-stream tasks and datasets.
Overall, we make three contributions in this work.
• We propose the setting of self-ordering point clouds by self-supervised learning, in which each point in a 3D cloud is ranked according to its importance without relying on any annotations.
• We develop an end-to-end trainable approach to learn a point-wise ordering. For this, we develop a novel differentiable point scoring-sorting strategy and con-struct a hierarchical contrastive scheme to obtain self-supervision signals.
• We extensively ablate the method and show its scala-bility and superior performance even compared to su-pervised point ordering methods on multiple datasets and tasks including zero-shot ordering of point clouds.
Code: https://github.com/PengWan-Yang/ self-ordering 2.