Abstract
Image compression techniques typically focus on com-pressing rectangular images for human consumption, how-ever, resulting in transmitting redundant content for down-stream applications. To overcome this limitation, some pre-vious works propose to semantically structure the bitstream, which can meet specific application requirements by selec-tive transmission and reconstruction. Nevertheless, they di-vide the input image into multiple rectangular regions ac-cording to semantics and ignore avoiding information in-teraction among them, causing waste of bitrate and dis-torted reconstruction of region boundaries. In this paper, we propose to decouple an image into multiple groups with irregular shapes based on a customized group mask and compress them independently. Our group mask describes the image at a finer granularity, enabling significant bi-trate saving by reducing the transmission of redundant con-tent. Moreover, to ensure the fidelity of selective reconstruc-tion, this paper proposes the concept of group-independent transform that maintain the independence among distinct groups. And we instantiate it by the proposed Group-Independent Swin-Block (GI Swin-Block). Experimental results demonstrate that our framework structures the bit-stream with negligible cost, and exhibits superior perfor-mance on both visual quality and intelligent task support-ing. 1.

Introduction
Image signal serves as a critical information carrier for various applications in modern society. Image compression techniques aim at converting images into compact represen-tations (i.e. bitstreams) to save transmission and storage re-sources. Lossy image compression is one of the most prac-tical techniques, as it allows for the restoration of important content while discarding a small amount of inessential in-formation. In the past decades, traditional image compres-* First two authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.
Figure 1. The input image is decoupled into groups ac-cording to distinct semantics. Then the semantically struc-tured bitstream (SSB) is generated by compressing the im-age based on the partitioned groups. The SSB facilitates downstream applications by selective bitstream transmis-sion and partial reconstruction, depending on the specific task requirements. sion standards [10,54,61,65,67] have been extensively stud-ied and utilized. With the fast development of deep learn-ing, neural image codecs [7, 8, 16, 27, 34, 40, 41, 50–52, 75] rapidly evolved and achieved promising results. Mean-while, more and more media contents tend to be han-dled by machine vision algorithms, such as recognition
[17, 26, 29, 32, 47], detection [43, 44, 55–57], and segmenta-tion [5,9,11,12,28,46,48,69,73]. However, most compres-sion methods are mainly developed for compressing reg-ular rectangular images for human consumption, without considering the efficiency and functionality for downstream tasks or human-machine interaction scenarios.
Recently, the field of image coding for machines (ICM) has emerged to develop a joint efficient and analytical framework for supporting intelligent analytics. End-to-end optimization of the trade-off between specific task loss and compression rate is a promising way [4, 13, 14, 18, 19, 38, 39, 49, 60], but it lacks generalization for massively diverse
applications. To overcome this limitation, Feng et al. [21] propose to compress general and compact features learned by self-supervised learning under entropy constraints for supporting downstream tasks. Nevertheless, it requires re-training the task model with the proposed features as inputs, which makes the overall performance heavily depend on the effectiveness of feature extraction. The methods mentioned above are designed specifically for scenarios of compres-sion for machine vision without considering situations in which human involvement is required. Semantically struc-tured image compression (SSIC) [62] proposes to gener-ate a semantically structured bitstream (SSB) by separately compressing rectangular regions of detected objects using a pre-prepared object detection toolbox. Although SSB is efficient in supporting intelligent tasks and human-machine interaction through partial transmission and reconstruction of the bitstream, its division approach based on rectangular regions may encounter problems with overlapped objects.
SSIC addresses this issue by replacing the overlapping ob-jects with a larger rectangular region, which can result in a waste of bitrate. In addition, SSIC generates the bitstream of each object by compressing the corresponding latent vari-ables in the latent domain directly, without considering the interaction and dependence of features during the transform process. This can lead to blurry and distorted group bound-aries in the partial reconstruction scenario, which in turn affects the reconstruction quality.
Going beyond the rectangular-based division, this pa-per proposes to decouple the image into multiple groups with irregular shapes based on a customized group mask.
Then the SSB is generated by independently compressing these groups and can support various requirements via se-lective transmission and reconstruction. Notably, the gen-eration of the group mask offers high flexibility in terms of shapes of groups, means of pre-analysis, and partition criteria, enabling customization to suit diverse application scenarios and requirements. Moreover, to avoid potential quality degradation in the partial reconstruction scenario, we propose the concept of the group-independent trans-form, which ensures the independence among groups in the latent representations and therefore the quality of the se-lective reconstruction will not be affected by the absence of other groups. More specifically, we instantiate it by carefully designing the Group-Independent Swin-Block (GI
Swin-Block), which is an extension of Swin Transformer
[47] tailored to our situation and requirements. GI Swin-Blocks make use of the hierarchical modeling capability of the Swin-Transformer [47, 75], achieving high coding effi-ciency under the premise of group independence. By com-bining the group mask based decoupling and the Group-Independent Swin-Block, our proposed method can effi-ciently support various downstream applications including human-machine interaction and machine vision tasks with only one bitstream generated.
The main contributions of our approach are summarized as follows:
• We propose to decouple an image into multiple groups with irregular shapes for structuring the bitstream. Our group mask can decribe spatial division at a finer gran-ularity manner than a typical rectangle, saving bitrate by reducing redundant content transmission.
• We propose the group-independent transform and instantiate it by carefully designing the Group-Independent Swin-Block (GI Swin-Block), which maintains powerful transformation capability and en-sures the independence among groups in the latent rep-resentations.
• Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed model achieves state-of-the-art compression ability and superior downstream tasks performance, which is a codec with both high compression efficiency and functionality. 2.