Abstract
Geometric frameworks for analyzing curves are com-mon in applications as they focus on invariant features and provide visually satisfying solutions to standard problems such as computing invariant distances, averaging curves, or registering curves. We show that for any smooth curve in Rd, d > 1, the generalized curvatures associated with the Frenet-Serret equation can be used to define a Rieman-nian geometry that takes into account all the geometric fea-tures of the shape. This geometry is based on a Square Root
Curvature Transform that extends the square root-velocity transform for Euclidean curves (in any dimensions) and provides likely geodesics that avoid artefacts encountered by representations using only first-order geometric infor-mation. Our analysis is supported by simulated data and is especially relevant for analyzing human motions. We con-sider trajectories acquired from sign language, and show the interest of considering curvature and also torsion in their analysis, both being physically meaningful. 1.

Introduction
Identifying and comparing different types of visual ob-jects is a fundamental task in machine learning and com-puter vision problems [13, 5, 8]. The shape is one of the essential features of objects that allow us to understand and characterize them. Nowadays, it is much easier to obtain data in the form of shapes, typically as dense point clouds or landmarks. The main task in shape analysis is to define a proper framework to compare and quantify the variation of the shapes. However, the shape space is generally nonlinear, and extracting meaningful information or features is com-plex. One of the successful approaches to shape analysis utilizes a Riemannian framework of differential geometry, where a metric can be defined between the shapes, which is invariant with respect to shape-preserving transformations such as translation and rotation. For instance, this gives rise to geodesic distances that are naturally invariant to smooth and optimal deformations through geodesic paths between the shapes [11]. This approach is very versatile as it can be adapted to various kinds of manifold-value data and can be designed to emphasize important geometric information to be preserved. As a consequence, several choices of met-rics are possible, such as the class of invariant Sobolev met-rics, often called elastic, for the analysis of curves [1]. In this work, we are concerned with curves that often arise in the application as trajectories (function of time) or motions (animation, activity recognition) and with the definition of a framework to compare their shapes. The differential ge-ometry of Euclidean curves is among the simplest (with re-spect to higher dimensional manifolds), and relatively sim-ple Riemannian metrics are available with different math-ematical representations of curves [28]. Quite remarkably, the introduction of the Square Root Velocity (SRV) trans-form [24] that consists of a particular representation of the shape of a curve enables to define a so-called elastic Rie-mannian distance, which has proven to be useful for the sta-tistical shape analysis of 2D and 3D curves in applications.
The SRV possesses interesting properties such as a princi-pled theoretical framework, efficient computation, and gen-eralization to higher dimensions [2]. Nevertheless, a limi-tation of the SRV transform and the corresponding elastic distance is the restrictive use of the first-order derivative, while the geometry of 3-D (or d-D) curves depends on the derivatives until order d. Indeed, it is well-known that a 3D curve is characterized by its curvature and its torsion: this is particularly critical when we consider trajectories or hu-man movements, where the curvature and torsion can have a physical meaning. 2.