Abstract
Recent studies have shown the vulnerability of CNNs un-der perturbation noises, which is partially caused by the reason that the well-trained CNNs are too biased toward the object texture, i.e., they make predictions mainly based on texture cues. To reduce this texture-bias, current stud-ies resort to learning augmented samples with heavily per-turbed texture to make networks be more biased toward rel-atively stable shape cues. However, such methods usually fail to achieve real shape-biased networks due to the insuf-ficient diversity of the shape cues. In this paper, we propose to augment the training dataset by generating semantically meaningful shapes and samples, via a shape deformation-based online augmentation, namely as SDbOA. The sam-ples generated by our SDbOA have two main merits. First, the augmented samples with more diverse shape variations enable networks to learn the shape cues more elaborately, which encourages the network to be shape-biased. Second, semantic-meaningful shape-augmentation samples could be produced by jointly regularizing the generator with ob-ject texture and edge-guidance soft constraint, where the edges are represented more robustly with a self information guided map to better against the noises on them. Extensive experiments under various perturbation noises demonstrate the obvious superiority of our shape-bias-motivated model over the state of the arts in terms of robustness performance.
Code is available at https://github.com/C0notSilly/-ICCV-23-Edge-Deformation-based-Online-Augmentation.
* Corresponding author
Figure 1. Comparison of different models’ predictions on texture-shape cue conflict samples [11] between Style Augmentation [21] (CVPRW’19), deformation augmentation in [43] and ours. Spe-cific to the testing image (a), the bottom row shows the original (b) and augmented (c)-(e) images for training. 1.

Introduction
Previous studies [13, 15, 38] have shown that convolu-tion neural networks (CNNs) are vulnerable to perturbation noises, e.g., adversarial noises. Such perturbation noises imposed on the benign image can easily falsify model’s pre-diction [28]. To improve the network robustness against these noises, algorithms of texture augmentation have been long studied to enable network to learn robust and discrimi-native object texture features of different categories [11,24].
However, recent studies revealed that the vulnerability of CNNs maybe caused by their ‘texture-bias’, i.e., the fea-tures learned for object recognition bias towards objects’ textures instead of their shapes [2, 11]. As illustrated in
Fig. 1, when the input image (a) contains a cat that is filled with an elephant’s texture, standard CNN networks are more likely to predict it as an elephant despite the obvi-ous shape difference between cats and elephants.
Consequently, some studies devote to reducing such
texture-bias to improve network robustness. Zhang et al. [47] found that CNNs learned with adversarial train-ing strategies are less texture-biased. Alternatively, shape-biased CNNs are revealed to be more robust under diverse adversarial attacks. Sun et al. [37] found that the net-work adversarial robustness can be improved by directly using edge maps to aid the training process. Carlucci et al. [4] proposed to train CNNs on jigsaw puzzles, which achieved superior performances by enabling the network to pay more attention on the cues contained in the global struc-ture. These works illustrate that the shape and structure fea-tures, e.g. edge map, can reduce the texture-bias with a stronger shape-bias, i.e. CNNs make predictions based on more shape cues, rather than texture cues.
However, current studies mainly learned the features of the object shape that is fixed, while the advantage of the shape diversity for devising a more shape-biased model is not well studied. Meanwhile, direct deformation augmenta-tion on images may destroy the object semantics, especially on the image boundary. Given the above observations, fol-lowing question naturally emerged: Can we implement data augmentation to the edge map to enhance the shape cues and reduce texture-bias ?
To this end, we propose a thin plate spline (TPS) [10]-based edge map deformation strategy to augment the shape representation of the training data, aiming to enhance the shape-bias of the well-trained network. To make the en-coded object shape less sensitive to the noises, we extend the edge map specific to only the object edges to include broader boundary regions via the self-information guided map [34]. Furthermore, to build up the correlation be-tween the deformed shape and the texture category to make the augmented samples more semantic-meaningful, we im-prove the generator with the additional supervision of de-noised texture cues and a shape-preservation loss.
Fig. 1 sheds light on the above motivation of our shape augmentation for enhancing networks’ shape-bias with a toy experiment, where the probabilities to the shape la-bel of an example sample [11] are predicted by the stan-dard ResNet-50, the Style Augmentation [21], the image deformation augmentation [43] and our method. Fig. 1 shows that the proposed algorithm achieves significantly larger probability predicted to the shape label, i.e. tabby cat over the baseline and the related approaches, which reveals the obvious tendency of the proposed SDbOA in applying shape cues for making predictions. For this observation, we argue that the proposed edge-deformation augmentation enables networks to learn the object shape cues more elab-orately, while reducing the contribution of the texture cues for prediction.
To the best of our knowledge, this work is one of the pi-oneer attempts to enhance shape-bias of networks based on the augmentation of object’s edges. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
• We propose a TPS-based edge deformation to aug-ment the object shape, and apply it to the online data augmentation, which could help learning more shape-biased networks.
• We a propose semantic-meaningful generation paradigm to produce shape-augmentation samples by jointly regularizing the generator with object texture and edge-guidance soft constraint, where a self information guided map is introduced to represent these edge cues more accurately and robustly.
• Extensive results show the superiority of the proposed algorithm over state of the arts (SOTAs) in terms of universal robustness under adversarial, backdoor and common corruption attacks and the training overhead. 2.