Abstract 2D poses
Skeleton sequence representation learning has shown great advantages for action recognition due to its promis-ing ability to model human joints and topology. However, the current methods usually require sufﬁcient labeled data for training computationally expensive models. Moreover, these methods ignore how to utilize the ﬁne-grained de-pendencies among different skeleton joints to pre-train an efﬁcient skeleton sequence learning model that can gen-eralize well across different datasets.
In this paper, we propose an efﬁcient skeleton sequence learning framework, named Skeleton Sequence Learning (SSL). To comprehen-sively capture the human pose and obtain discriminative skeleton sequence representation, we build an asymmet-ric graph-based encoder-decoder pre-training architecture named SkeletonMAE, which embeds skeleton joint sequence into graph convolutional network and reconstructs the masked skeleton joints and edges based on the prior human topology knowledge. Then, the pre-trained SkeletonMAE encoder is integrated with the Spatial-Temporal Represen-tation Learning (STRL) module to build the SSL frame-work. Extensive experimental results show that our SSL generalizes well across different datasets and outperforms the state-of-the-art self-supervised skeleton-based methods on FineGym, Diving48, NTU 60 and NTU 120 datasets.
Moreover, we obtain comparable performance to some fully supervised methods. The code is avaliable at https:
//github.com/HongYan1123/SkeletonMAE. 1.

Introduction
Human action recognition has attracted increasing atten-tion in video understanding [83, 7, 45, 60, 39], due to its wide applications [2, 14, 61, 51, 52, 86, 44] in human-*Both authors contributed equally to this work.
†Corresponding author.
Masked Skeleton
Reconstructed
Mask arm joints
Skeleton
MAE
Randomly mask
MAE
Mask arm joints
Skeleton
MAE
Randomly mask
MAE (cid:28615) (cid:28609) (cid:28613) (cid:28616) (cid:28615) (cid:28609) (b) (c)
Masked adjacent edge
Masked joint
Salto backward  tucked 
Salto backward tucked with 1 twist
Adjacent edge (a) (cid:28615)
Joint
Figure 1: Traditional MAE usually uses random mask-ing strategy to reconstruct skeleton, which tends to ignore action-sensitive skeleton regions. Differently, our proposed
SkeletonMAE reconstructs the masked skeleton joints and edges based on the prior human topology knowledge, to ob-tain a comprehensive perception of the action. computer interaction, intelligent surveillance security, vir-tual reality, etc.
In terms of visual perception [24], even without appearance information, humans can identify ac-tion categories by only observing the motion of joints. Un-like RGB videos [3, 14, 13], the skeleton sequences only contain the coordinate information of the key joints of the human body [84], which is high-level, light-weighted, and robust against complex backgrounds and various conditions including viewpoint, scale, and movement speed [11, 69].
Additionally, with the development of human pose estima-tion algorithms [8, 1, 85], the localization method of human joints (i.e., key points) has made great progress and it is feasible to obtain accurate skeleton sequences. At present, the existing 2D pose estimation method is more accurate and more robust than the 3D pose estimation methods [11].
In Figure 1 (a), we visualize 2D poses estimated with HR-Net [67] for two action classes on FineGym dataset [59]. It
can be seen that the 2D poses can accurately capture human skeletons and motion details.
Due to the promising ability to model multiple granu-larities and large variations in human motion, the skeleton sequence is more suitable to distinguish similar actions with subtle differences than the RGB data. To capture discrim-inative spatial-temporal motion patterns, most of the exist-ing skeleton-based action recognition methods [11, 83, 5] are fully supervised and usually require large amounts of labeled data for training elaborate models, which is time-consuming and labor-intensive. To mitigate the problem of limited labeled training data, self-supervised skeleton-based action recognition methods [31, 18, 65] have attracted increasing attention recently. Some contrastive learning methods [31, 18] adopted data augmentation to generate pairs of positive and negative samples, but they rely heavily on the number of contrastive pairs. With the popularity of the encoder-decoder [64, 48], some methods [91, 65] recon-structed the masked skeleton sequence by link reconstruc-tion to encourage the topological closeness following the paradigm of graph encoder-decoder. However, these meth-ods are usually good at link prediction and node clustering but are unsatisfactory in node and graph classiﬁcations. For accurate action recognition, the ﬁne-grained dependencies among different skeleton joints (i.e., graph classiﬁcations) are essential. Therefore, previous self-supervised learning-based methods tend to ignore the ﬁne-grained dependen-cies among different skeleton joints, which restricts the gen-eralization of self-supervised skeleton representation. As shown in Figure 1 (b)-(c), the arm joints and edges are es-sential to discriminate between these two similar actions.
Different from the randomly masking strategy of MAE [20], our masking strategy is action-sensitive and reconstructs speciﬁc limbs or body parts that dominate the given ac-tion class. Our SkeletonMAE utilizes prior human topology knowledge to guide the reconstruction of the masked skele-ton joints and edges to achieve a comprehensive perception of the joints, topology, and action.
To address the aforementioned challenges, we pro-pose an efﬁcient skeleton sequence representation learn-ing framework, named Skeleton Sequence Learning (SSL).
To fully discover the ﬁne-grained dependencies among different skeleton joints, we build a novel asymmet-ric graph-based encoder-decoder pre-training architecture named SkeletonMAE that embeds skeleton joint sequences in Graph Convolutional Network (GCN). The Skeleton-MAE aims to reconstruct the masked human skeleton joints and edges based on prior human topology knowledge so that it can infer the underlying topology of the joints and obtain a comprehensive perception of human action. To learn discriminative spatial-temporal skeleton representa-tion, the pre-trained SkeletonMAE encoder is integrated with the Spatial-Temporal Representation Learning (STRL) module to learn spatial-temporal dependencies. Finally, the
SSL is ﬁne-tuned on action recognition datasets. Extensive experimental results on FineGym, Diving48, NTU 60 and
NTU 120 show that our SSL generalizes well across dif-ferent datasets and outperforms the state-of-the-art methods signiﬁcantly. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• To comprehensively capture human pose and obtain discriminative skeleton sequence representation, we propose a graph-based encoder-decoder pre-training architecture named SkeletonMAE, that embeds skele-ton joint sequence into GCN and utilize the prior hu-man topology knowledge to guide the reconstruction of the underlying masked joints and topology.
• To learn comprehensive spatial-temporal dependen-cies for skeleton sequence, we propose an efﬁcient skeleton sequence learning framework, named Skele-ton Sequence Learning (SSL), which integrates the pre-trained SkeletonMAE encoder with the Spatial-Temporal Representation Learning (STRL) module.
• Extensive experimental results on FineGym, Div-ing48, NTU 60 and NTU 120 datasets show that our SSL outperforms the state-of-the-art self-supervised skeleton-based action recognition methods and achieves comparable performance compared with the state-of-the-art fully supervised methods. 2.