Abstract
In this paper, we propose Skip-Plan, a condensed action space learning method for procedure planning in instruc-tional videos. Current procedure planning methods all stick to the state-action pair prediction at every timestep and gen-erate actions adjacently. Although it coincides with human intuition, such a methodology consistently struggles with high-dimensional state supervision and error accumulation on action sequences.
In this work, we abstract the pro-cedure planning problem as a mathematical chain model.
By skipping uncertain nodes and edges in action chains, we transfer long and complex sequence functions into short but reliable ones in two ways. First, we skip all the inter-mediate state supervision and only focus on action predic-tions. Second, we decompose relatively long chains into multiple short sub-chains by skipping unreliable intermedi-ate actions. By this means, our model explores all sorts of reliable sub-relations within an action sequence in the con-densed action space. Extensive experiments show Skip-Plan achieves state-of-the-art performance on the CrossTask and
COIN benchmarks for procedure planning. 1.

Introduction
Given the initial and goal visual observations which are curated from instructional videos [44, 37], the task of pro-cedure planning is to predict a sequence of actions to reach the indicated goal [7], as illustrated in Figure 1(a). This is an emerging research direction in the field of video under-standing. Procedure planning has worldwide applications and assists humans with instruction-following tasks, such as cooking, assembling furniture, electronics repair, etc.
* indicates the corresponding author.
Figure 1. Comparisons of the conventional paradigm and our proposed Skip-Plan in procedure planning. (a) Problem defi-nition: given the initial and goal visual observations (vstart and vgoal), procedure planning is to answer an action sequence to reach the indicated goal with a pre-defined time horizon T . (b)
Conventional paradigm predicts a state-action pair {˜st, ˜at} at ev-ery timestep t, and repeat it step-by-step. (c) Our Skip-Plan skips state supervision and extracts multiple sub-chains by skip-ping most intermediate actions. The final action sequence is ac-cumulated from all predicted sub-chains. Skip-Plan significantly reduces the overall compound error, indicated by the shallower darkness of the chevron arrows.
In the past few years, various approaches have been pro-posed to solve the procedure planning problem. Most ex-isting methods utilize an autoregressive model with visual state supervision to generate actions one by one [7, 4, 36].
Another type of work [41] solves it in a non-autoregressive way with language state supervision. The difficulties of pro-cedure planning have been widely discussed in the previ-ous works. For instance, the sequential orders in procedure planning can be altered but still sensible (e.g., switching the order of ‘pour water’ and ‘pour alcohol’ does not matter in many cases), and the visual states are unstructured and high-dimensional. Thus, we can conclude the following limita-tions from the existing works. (a) State supervision: the major difficulty in procedure planning is state supervision.
Visual images are high-dimensional and complex, with ex-tra misleading information such as background, illumina-tion, viewing point, etc. (b) Step-by-step predictions: the conventional paradigm in procedure planning predicts one state-action pair at every timestep, and repeats it step-by-step, as illustrated in Figure 1(b). Even though the pro-posed non-autoregressive model generates whole action se-quences in batches [41], it can be still regarded as a step-by-step method because the model neglects the links between non-adjacent actions. From Figure 1(b), we can see while predicting an action sequence with a time horizon of 4, the conventional model is equivalently predicting a sequence with a length of 7 (4 action nodes, 3 state nodes). More frequent predictions tend to accumulate a larger compound error along the chain, which lowers the prediction accuracy.
To overcome these limitations, we propose Skip-Plan, a condensed action space learning method that solves the pro-cedure planning problem through the lens of mathematics, aiming to reduce compound error along action chains. As we have discussed above, existing methods struggle with high-dimensional and complex state supervision. Thus, the compound error along the action chain is increased due to large errors in state predictions. This motivates us to skip all the state nodes in our Skip-Plan framework and only model sequence relations in the condensed action space, as demonstrated in Figure 1(c). Without the presence of state supervision, a lower compound error results in better performance in Skip-Plan. Although the dependencies be-tween high-level actions without state supervision are very abstract, the algorithm of our Skip-Plan is highly mathemat-ically sensible in the Markov chain model.
Another convention in procedure planning is we should learn sequential relations between adjacent actions. The
Markov chain model inspires us to decouple relatively long chains into multiple short sub-chains, because the com-pound error can be reduced with shorter chain lengths. The problem here is how to decouple these long chains, be-cause there are various choices of sub-chains with differ-ent lengths and we should always choose the most reliable ones under any condition. Given the initial and goal frames as concrete inputs, it is apparent the reliabilities of the ini-tial and final actions are the highest, and the intermediate actions are more likely to be predicted wrong. Therefore, our Skip-Plan decomposes long chains by ‘skipping’ some unreliable intermediate actions, and each sub-chain in our model is composed of the initial action, one unique inter-mediate action, and the final action. One example for a chain length of 4 is shown in Figure 1(c). In this way, the reliable sub-relations between non-adjacent actions can be well explored by the network. To model the discriminative relations of all sub-chains, we propose sub-chain decoders, where each decoder only learns one sub-chain by the spe-cific loss design. The final action sequence is aggregated from all sub-chain predictions by a sub-chain accumulator.
In summary, our contributions are threefold. (a) Unlike the previous methods which put sophisticated designs on state supervision, Skip-Plan skips unreliable state predic-tions to boost the model performance in procedure plan-ning. (b) In contrast to the existing methods which only focus on the links between adjacent actions, we decompose long chains into multiple reliable sub-chains by skipping some intermediate actions, and propose sub-chain decoders to learn their discriminative relations. (c) Extensive ex-periments show Skip-Plan achieves state-of-the-art perfor-mance on the CrossTask [44] and COIN [37] benchmarks for procedure planning. 2.