Abstract
Snowfall is a common weather phenomenon that can severely affect computer vision tasks by obscuring objects and scenes. However, existing deep learning-based snow removal methods are designed for single images only. In this paper, we target a more complex task – video snow removal, which aims to restore the clear video from the snowy video. To facilitate this task, we propose the ﬁrst high-quality video dataset, which simulates realistic physi-cal characteristics of snow and haze using a rendering en-gine and augmentation techniques. We also develop a deep learning framework for video snow removal. Speciﬁcally, we propose a snow-query temporal aggregation module and a snow-aware contrastive learning loss function. The mod-ule aggregates features between video frames and removes snow effectively, while the loss function helps identify and eliminate snow features. We conduct extensive experiments and demonstrate that our proposed dataset is more real-istic than previous datasets, and the models trained on it achieve better performance in real-world snowing images.
Our proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art video and image-based methods on both synthetic and real snowy videos. 1.

Introduction
Snowfall is a common weather phenomenon that can sig-niﬁcantly affect visibility in photographs, interfering with and reducing the accuracy of computer vision tasks such as target detection [34], tracking [14], and autonomous driving
[33]. Image and video restoration [39, 23, 48, 37, 46, 7, 5, 26, 40, 43, 42, 41, 45, 31] is a widely studied direction, but research on image and video snow removal is still limited.
Removing snow is crucial for improving accuracy and ro-bustness of computer vision tasks. Additionally, snow can obstruct objects, decreasing image and video quality. Snow removal is a challenging task that requires distinguishing snowﬂake regions from the background and restoring ob-scured scenes, complicated by the complex geometric shape and texture of snowﬂakes. Moreover, snowfall often comes with haze, which further obscures the images.
Contrast with single image, the video provides richer in-formation about the dynamic features of the scene, i.e., a consecutive frame sequence on the temporal dimension. Al-though recent image snow removal algorithms [25, 11, 12, 50, 8, 10] have achieved good results, applying these al-gorithms directly to video snow removal is inappropriate because image algorithms ignore temporal information in video frames and this information could be very useful to improve snow removal outcomes. As such, it is signiﬁcant to conduct in-depth research and exploration for snow video data. Previous studies have explored some aspects of video desnowing, such as methods based on non-deep learning
[32, 18] or online learning [22]. However, deep learning-based video desnowing remains an under-researched area.
A major challenge for applying deep learning methods is the lack of high-quality video desnowing datasets. In the era of powerful deep learning, this becomes an urgent prob-lem that needs to be addressed. In fact, the lack of appropri-ate datasets has signiﬁcantly slowed down the progress of deep learning-based video snow removal research, which has been a bottleneck in this ﬁeld.
To this end, we present the ﬁrst high-quality annotated video dataset for video snow removal: Realistic Video
DeSnowing Dataset (RVSD). RVSD contains a total of 110 pairs of videos. Each pair contains snowy and hazy videos and corresponding snow-free and haze-free ground truth videos. Unlike previous image datasets that simulate snow using Photoshop, we use a rendering engine and various augmentation techniques to generate snow with diverse and realistic physical properties. This results in more realistic and varied synthesized videos, which improve the model’s performance on real-world data. To further enhance the model’s performance, we also consider the effect of haze
a. City Day b. City Night c. Nature
Snow100K
SnowCityScape
SnowCityScape
SRRS
CSD
Figure 1: Samples of the proposed dataset (left) and previous datasets (right). Refer to the supplementary to see the videos. in snowy conditions. Previous methods for fog synthesis relied on mathematical models with limitations, such as re-quiring accurate depth information and assuming ﬁxed and uniform haze characteristics. However, real-world snowy conditions involve dynamic and heterogeneous haze. To overcome these limitations, we propose a new haze model that uses Unreal Engine 5 to render storm haze and obtain a haze layer. We then fuse the haze layer with the input video after data augmentation to produce more diverse and realistic haze, better simulating real snowy conditions. We conduct experiments to show that our proposed dataset has more-realistic snow scenes than existing datasets, and mod-els trained on our dataset achieve better snow removal per-formance on real snowy images. Therefore, our dataset can facilitate the training and evaluation of video snow removal algorithms, and advance video snow removal research.
Trivially applying the video processing methods on our dataset may result in suboptimal since they do not consider snow and haze properties. Moreover, there are no exist-ing deep learning-based methods for video snow removal.
Therefore, we propose the ﬁrst deep learning-based frame-work in this work. Our framework consists of three main steps. First, we perform preliminary snow removal on sin-gle frames to reduce the effect of snow occlusion on optical
ﬂow estimation and video feature alignment. Second, we fuse the video frames and perceive and remove the snow.
We introduce a novel “snow-query temporal aggregation module”, which aggregates features across video frames while perceiving and removing snow. Third, we design a new “snow-aware contrastive loss”, which leverages the prior knowledge that snowﬂakes have different shapes, mo-tion directions, and other characteristics in different videos.
This loss function helps identify and remove snow features more accurately. We conduct extensive experiments to show that our proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose the ﬁrst high-quality video dataset (RVSD) for video snow removal. We use the Unreal
Engine and various augmentation techniques to pro-duce snow and haze with diverse and realistic physical characteristics.
• Comprehensive experiments show that the visual effect of our proposed snow removal dataset is more realis-tic than previous datasets, and the models trained on our proposed dataset can achieve better performance in real-world snowy images.
• A deep learning-based video snow removal framework is proposed. The snow-aware temporal aggregation module and snow-aware contrastive learning loss are introduced, to effectively remove snow. Experiments prove that our method enables the best performance. 2.