Abstract
We propose Social Diffusion, a novel method for short-term and long-term forecasting of the motion of multiple persons as well as their social interactions. Jointly fore-casting motions for multiple persons involved in social ac-tivities is inherently a challenging problem due to the inter-dependencies between individuals. In this work, we lever-age a diffusion model conditioned on motion histories and causal temporal convolutional networks to forecast indi-vidually and contextually plausible motions for all partic-ipants. The contextual plausibility is achieved via an order-invariant aggregation function. As a second contribution, we design a new evaluation protocol that measures the plau-sibility of social interactions which we evaluate on the Hag-gling dataset, which features a challenging social activity where people are actively taking turns to talk and switching their attention. We evaluate our approach on four datasets for multi-person forecasting where our approach outper-forms the state-of-the-art in terms of motion realism and contextual plausibility. 1.

Introduction
Understanding and anticipating social interactions in groups of people is a challenging and highly relevant topic [35, 9, 32, 45, 47, 5, 34]. For instance, it is essen-tial for socially-compliant robots [44], but it is also relevant for neuroscience and social sciences since it allows to de-velop computational models on how the behavior of other persons is perceived and how it changes the own behavior.
Forecasting realistic social interactions, however, is very challenging for two reasons. First, social interactions tend to last for tens of seconds [33] or even minutes - much longer than the prediction from most of the existing human
*Work done partially while Julian was at Reality Labs Research. motion anticipation models [23, 69, 3, 22, 27, 42, 49, 11, 25, 37, 4, 14, 41, 40]. Second, social interactions consist of in-terdependent motions [54, 36], which requires modeling the relationships among all individuals. For example, in conver-sational turn-taking, a person’s turn to talk highly depends on the start/end of the others’ speaking. While multi-person motion anticipation has emerged as a new topic, current ap-proaches [23, 69, 3] do not pay much attention on complex social interactions. For instance, they do not preserve the social role of individuals in a group such that the interac-tions become socially implausible over time.
To address the limitations of existing models, we pro-pose Social Diffusion to predict motions of multiple peo-ple and ensure contextually plausible interactions, as shown in Fig. 1. To this end, we learn the distribution of human motion by leveraging a diffusion model [39, 28, 52, 58, 24, 59, 62, 73]. To enforce information exchange among people, which is critical to predicting contextually plausi-ble interactions, we introduce an order-invariant aggrega-tion function to aggregate motion features from all people.
For inference, we feed back the input sequence to the signal during the reverse-diffusion steps to condition the motion generation on the past motion. Our method is fully convo-lutional which allows us to generate sequences of arbitrary size. This allows us to not just forecast the next few seconds of an input motion but also to forecast social interactions that last longer. Furthermore, our approach is very flexi-ble in the sense that the number of persons during training and inference can differ. To the best of our knowledge, our approach represents the first diffusion model that produces multi-person motions at the same time.
As a second contribution, we propose a new evaluation protocol for social interactions based on Symbolic Social
Cues, which measures whether the forecast motion is so-cially plausible. Our key observation is that the probabilities of transitions between social interaction states are highly
Figure 1: We propose an approach for multi-person motion anticipation: given a sequence of human social interactions (blue-red skeletons), the proposed model forecasts multi-person motions where the social roles are preserved and the interactions are socially plausible. correlated with the plausibility of predicted social interac-tions. In a conversation, for example, a person usually starts talking only when a peer stops talking. To evaluate pre-dicted motions, we first build the state transition graph by extracting states from the motions. We then treat the state transition graph as a probability distribution and compare it to the real data distribution.
For evaluation, we use the Haggling dataset [30] which comprises 175 videos of well-defined triadic social inter-actions. In contrast to other existing multi-person human motion datasets [43, 66, 69], the persons have different so-cial roles that impact their behavior. We furthermore eval-uate our approach on the MuPoTS-3D [43], 3DPW [67], and CMU-Mocap [1, 69] dataset. On all four datasets, our approach outperforms the state of the art for multi-person human motion forecasting.
In summary, our contribution is two-fold: 1. We propose Social Diffusion, the first stochastic multi-person motion anticipation model that outperforms the state of the art on common multi-person motion antic-ipation datasets. 2. We propose a novel social interaction evaluation pro-tocol that considers not only the validity of poses but also the plausibility of social interactions. 2.