Abstract
Human Pose Estimation (HPE) is widely used in various fields, including motion analysis, healthcare, and virtual re-ality. However, the great expenses of labeled real-world datasets present a significant challenge for HPE. To over-come this, one approach is to train HPE models on synthetic datasets and then perform domain adaptation (DA) on real-world data. Unfortunately, existing DA methods for HPE neglect data privacy and security by using both source and target data in the adaptation process. source model,
To this end, we propose a new task, named source-free domain adaptive HPE, which aims to address the challenges of cross-domain learning of HPE without ac-cess to source data during the adaptation process. We further propose a novel framework that consists of three models: intermediate model, and tar-get model, which explores the task from both source-The source-protect and target-relevant perspectives. protect module preserves source information more effec-tively while resisting noise, and the target-relevant module reduces the sparsity of spatial representations by building a novel spatial probability space, and pose-specific con-trastive learning and information maximization are pro-posed on the basis of this space. Comprehensive experi-ments on several domain adaptive HPE benchmarks show that the proposed method outperforms existing approaches by a considerable margin. The codes are available at https://github.com/davidpengucf/SFDAHPE. 1.

Introduction
The accuracy of 2D human pose estimation (HPE) from monocular images has been significantly improved through the use of deep neural networks. However, obtaining suf-ficient labeled data for training such models is a labori-ous and time-consuming task, particularly for real-world datasets that require diverse appearances and poses with ground truth annotations. In contrast, the development of computer graphics and game engines has facilitated the gen-eration of annotated synthetic datasets that can generate a virtually unlimited number of labeled samples. Neverthe-less, models trained on synthetic data may not perform well on real-world data due to the domain gap or differences in data distribution. To address this challenge, domain adapta-tion (DA) is essential to enable synthetic data-trained mod-els to generalize to real-world data.
Recently, source-free domain adaptation has gained sig-nificant attention due to its practicality in real-world scenar-ios, where using labeled source data during the adaptation is expensive or not feasible due to data privacy and secu-rity concerns. However, existing source-free domain adap-tation methods in classification tasks may not be directly applicable to more complex tasks, such as 2D human pose estimation (HPE). This is because HPE requires estimating the spatial locations of different body joints, instead of just the object’s category as classification does, making it more challenging to adapt from source to target domains. There-fore, there is a pressing need to develop effective source-free domain adaptation techniques specifically tailored to
HPE tasks. This motivates us to propose a new task named source-free domain adaptive HPE in this paper.
The task of source-free domain adaptive HPE presents challenges from both the source-free DA and pose esti-mation perspectives. Specifically, in traditional DA tasks, source data can participate in the adaptation process, allow-ing for a focus on reducing domain shifts between source and target. However, in source-free DA, only the pretrained source model can be used during adaptation, leading to catastrophic forgetting of the source domain. Directly ap-plying the source pretrained model can also introduce noise due to domain shifts. Therefore, balancing the absorption of the source model’s knowledge with the resistance of the source model’s noise is critical. Current methods tend to adopt a progressive replacement strategy to alleviate the runoff of source information. For example, [21, 22] use the previous model to supervise ongoing adaptation, thereby evoking the source-related memory, while [32, 6] use the exponential moving average (EMA) strategy to slow down the forgetting of the source. Although these methods alle-viate the negative impact of noise successfully, they mod-ify the overall parameters of the pretrained source model
significantly, leading to the disappearance of source-related knowledge and representations during the adaptation pro-cess. Therefore, it is necessary to develop source-protect modules that can protect source information more effec-tively while resisting noise at the same time.
Moreover, we outline another challenge of source-free domain adaptive HPE: the sparsity of keypoints (i.e. key body joints) in an image. When it comes to domain adap-tation (DA) in classification, achieving distribution align-ment to reduce domain gap is a straightforward process as the outputs can be represented in a probability space that includes all the categories. However, the same cannot be said for Human Pose Estimation (HPE) based on a com-plete image, as each keypoint has a specific distance from others based on bone lengths, and the number of keypoints
K (e.g., 14 for human pose and 21 for hand pose) is signif-icantly smaller than the number of pixels in an image (e.g., 512×512≈0.26M), making it a challenging task. Although heatmaps [34, 33] are commonly used to predict keypoints (heatmap representation-based 2D HPE is considered as the mainstream approach for HPE) while reducing dimension-ality in HPE, the number of pixels inside the heatmap is still considerable (e.g. 128×128≈16K) in comparison to
K. Therefore, building a spatial probability space for the keypoints based on either the entire image or the heatmap is not ideal. [12] proposes constructing a low-dimensional dis-tribution based solely on the K keypoints, effectively trans-forming the HPE task into a K-classification task. However, this spatial distribution relies on clear decision boundaries between distinctive keypoints, which is not reasonable in
HPE. In other words, all samples can be classified to a cer-tain category in classification, but most pixels inside an im-age (e.g. more than 97% if the fault tolerance is decided by the metric PCK@0.05) can not be assigned to a certain key-point in HPE, but mispredictions may occur at these unpre-sented locations. Hence, it is necessary to develop a novel spatial probability space that reduces sparsity while provid-ing complete representations of the prediction space.
To address the aforementioned task-specific challenges, we propose a novel framework that incorporates source-free domain adaptive HPE from both source-protect and target-relevant perspectives. Our framework consists of three models: the source model, the intermediate model, and the target model. Source model preserves source information, and target model absorbs knowledge from target data, while intermediate model interacts with both of them to reduce the domain gap between source and target implicitly, thereby used for the final inference. In the source-protect modules, we conduct knowledge transfer between the source model and the intermediate model to prevent catastrophic forget-ting of the source-related information. We transfer knowl-edge from the source model to the intermediate model while keeping the source model’s feature extractor fixed. To re-sist noise, we propose a new residual loss and finetune the source model’s regressor. In the target-relevant modules, we conduct executions between the intermediate model and the target model to mitigate domain shifts between the source and target domains. We build a new spatial probability space for HPE to alleviate the sparsity problem. On the ba-sis of this space, we propose contrastive learning and infor-mation maximization designed specifically for human pose estimation. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We construct a new task named source-free domain adap-tive human pose estimation, which focuses on the cross-domain learning of HPE without access to source data during the adaptation process.
• We propose a new framework consisting of three mod-els: source model, intermediate model, and target model, which explores the task from both source-protect and target-relevant perspectives.
• We conduct comprehensive experiments on several do-main adaptive HPE benchmarks and the results show that our method outperforms the existing approaches by a con-siderable margin. 2.