Abstract
Multi-object tracking (MOT) in sports scenes plays a critical role in gathering players statistics, supporting fur-ther applications, such as automatic tactical analysis. Yet existing MOT benchmarks cast little attention on this do-main.
In this work, we present a new large-scale multi-object tracking dataset in multiple sports scenes, coined as SportsMOT, where all players on the court are sup-posed to be tracked.
It consists of 240 video sequences, over 150K frames (almost 15× MOT17) and over 1.6M bounding boxes (3× MOT17) collected from 3 sports cat-egories, including basketball, volleyball and football. Our dataset is characterized with two key properties: 1) fast and variable-speed motion and 2) similar yet distinguish-able appearance. We expect SportsMOT to encourage the
MOT trackers to promote in both motion-based associa-tion and appearance-based association. We benchmark several state-of-the-art trackers and reveal the key chal-lenge of SportsMOT lies in object association. To alleviate the issue, we further propose a new multi-object tracking framework, termed as MixSort, introducing a MixFormer-like structure as an auxiliary association model to pre-vailing tracking-by-detection trackers. By integrating the customized appearance-based association with the original motion-based association, MixSort achieves state-of-the-art performance on SportsMOT and MOT17. Based on Mix-Sort, we give an in-depth analysis and provide some pro-found insights into SportsMOT. 1.

Introduction
Multi-object tracking (MOT) has been a fundamental computer vision task for recent decades, aiming to locate the objects and associate them in video sequences. Re-searchers have cast much focus on various practical use cases like crowded street scenes [9, 27], static dancing scenes [33] and driving scenarios [14], achieving consid-* Equal contribution. (cid:66) : Corresponding author. erable progress [2, 4, 30, 37, 38, 40, 41] in MOT. MOT for sports scenes however is overlooked, where typically only the players on the court should be tracked for further analy-sis, such as counting the players’ running distance or aver-age speed and automatic tactical analysis.
Generally, prevailing state-of-the-art trackers [1,6,11,39, 44] consist of several components to accomplish the track-ing task: objects localization module, motion based objects association module and appearance based association mod-ule. Biased to the data distribution of specific human track-ing benchmarks, e.g. MOT17 [27], MOT20 [9] and Dance-Track [33], the components of these trackers have difficulty adapting to sports scenes. Firstly, motivated by surveillance or self-driving applications, current human tracking bench-marks provide tracks for almost all persons in the scenes.
While for sports scenes like basketball or football games, generally only the players on the court are what we focus on, hence a specialized training platform is required to make the detectors suitable for sports scenes. More importantly, in MOT17 and MOT20, these trackers highlight Kalman
Filter [16] based IoU matching for object association, due to the slow and regular motion of pedestrians. DanceTrack highlights diverse motion rather than fast movement [33], that is, dancers frequently switch the motion direction and relative position. However in sports scenes, we observe fast and variable-speed movement of objects on adjacent frames, i.e. players usually possess high speed and fre-quently change their running speed in professional sports events, thus constituting barriers in existing motion based association. For instance, as visualized in Fig. 1, the ad-jacent IoU and Kalman-Filter-based IoU in sports scenes remain lower than that on MOT17 and DanceTrack (More detailed comparison can be found in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3). As a consequence, more suitable motion based association for sports scenes is required. Additionally, compared to the
MOT17 and MOT20 datasets in street scenes, the objects appearances in sports scenes are less distinguishable, since not only the players inherently are in similar clothes but also the players are frequently blurred caused by fast camera mo-tion or targets motion. Different from DanceTrack, where generally the dancers are in almost the same clothes and
Figure 1. Sampled sequences from the categories of basketball and football of SportsMOT, MOT17 and DanceTrack. There exist two key properties of SportsMOT: 1) fast and variable-speed motion, i.e. players usually possess high speed and frequently change their running speed (the visualized adjacent IoU and Kalman Filter based adjacent IoU can indicate the property); 2) similar yet distinguishable appearance, that is, players in sports scenes inherently wear jerseys with different numbers and usually display distinct postures. We expect
SportsMOT to encourage the MOT trackers to promote in both motion-based association and appearance based association. thus having indistinguishable appearance, players in sports scenes inherently wear jerseys with different numbers and usually display distinct postures. Thereby, we argue that objects in sports scenes are with similar yet distinguishable appearance, which necessitates the appearance model de-veloping more discriminative and extensive representations.
Considering the analysis above, to advance the devel-opment of tracking and sports analysis, we propose a multi-object tracking dataset in sports scenes, termed as
SportsMOT. The dataset is large-scale, high-quality and contains dense annotations for every player on the court in various sports scenes. It consists of 240 videos, over 150K frames (almost 15× MOT17 [27]) and over 1.6M bound-ing boxes (3× MOT17 [27]) collected from 3 categories of sports, including basketball, volleyball and football. To pro-vide a platform for making the trackers suitable for sports scenes, we split the dataset into training, validation and test subsets, consisting of 45, 45 and 150 video sequences re-spectively. There exist two core properties of SportsMOT: (1) fast and variable-speed motion, requiring more suitable motion modeling association; (2) similar yet distinguish-able appearance, which necessitates the appearance model developing more discriminative and extensive representa-tions. Altogether, we expect SportsMOT to encourage the trackers to promote in both the certain aspects, i.e. motion based association and appearance based association. tracking dataset
Given the large-scale multi-object
SportsMOT, we benchmark some recent tracking ap-proaches and retrain all of them on the training split. We ob-serve IDF1 and AssA metrics are lower than that on MOT17 while the DetA is quite high, indicating that the main chal-lenge of SportsMOT lies in objects association rather than objects localization. To alleviate the issue, we propose a new multi-object tracking framework, dubbed as MixSort, with introducing a MixFormer-like [8] structure as appear-ance based association to prevailing tracking-by-detection trackers (e.g. ByteTrack [44], OC-SORT [6]). By inte-grating the original motion based objects association and the designed appearance based association, the performance gets boosted on both SportsMOT and MOT17 benchmarks.
Based on MixSort, we perform extensive exploration stud-ies and provide some profound insights into SportsMOT.
The main contributions are summarized as follows:
• We build a new large-scale multi-object tracking dataset in diverse sports scenes, SportsMOT, equipped with two key properties of 1) fast and variable-speed motion and 2) similar yet distinguishable appearance, aiming to advance the development of both tracking and sports analysis.
• We some benchmark on trackers
SportsMOT, which reveals that the key challenge lies in objects association and hopefully can facilitate further research. prevailing
• We propose a new multi-object tracking framework
MixSort, with introducing a MixFormer-like structure as appearance based association model to prevailing tracking-by-detection trackers, so as to boost the ob-jects association. Based on MixSort, we perform ex-tensive studies and provide some profound insights into SportsMOT.
Dataset
Videos
Frames
Length (s)
Bbox
Tracks
MOT17
MOT20
DanceTrack
SportsMOT 14 8 100 240 11,235 13,410 105,855 150,379 463 535 5,292 6,015 292,733 1,652,040
-1,629,490 1,342 3,456 990 3,401
Table 1. Comparison of statistics between existing human MOT datasets and our SportsMOT. 2.