Abstract 1.

Introduction
We propose a novel and efficient method for reconstruct-ing manifold surfaces from point clouds. Unlike previ-ous approaches that use dense implicit reconstructions or piecewise approximations and overlook inherent structures like quadrics in CAD models, our method faithfully pre-serves these quadric structures by assembling primitives.
To achieve high-quality primitive extraction, we use a vari-ational shape approximation, followed by a mesh arrange-ment for space partitioning and candidate primitive patches generation. We then introduce an effective pruning mech-anism to classify candidate primitive patches as active or inactive, and further prune inactive patches to reduce the search space and speed up surface extraction significantly.
Finally, the optimal active patches are computed by a bi-nary linear programming and assembled as manifold and watertight surfaces. We perform extensive experiments on a wide range of CAD objects to validate its effectiveness.
*The authors contribute equally to this work.
†Corresponding author (yandongming@gmail.com).
The problem of converting unorganized point clouds into surface meshes, also known as surface reconstruction, has various applications in 3D vision, computer graphics, and architecture geometry.
In recent decades, although many powerful algorithms have been devoted to pursuing faith-ful and accurate reconstructions [19, 21, 34, 28, 27, 49], it remains a challenging task due to the inherent ill-posed na-ture [11, 36, 5].
The popular Poisson reconstruction methods [24, 25] im-plicitly generate dense smooth surfaces for point clouds, while others mainly focus on giving a compact approxi-mation to objects by piecewise planar shapes or polygo-nal meshes [7, 13, 3, 35]. However, man-made objects in real-world scenarios are typically composed of non-planar quadratic surfaces or quadric structures, such as the
Computer-Aided Design (CAD) models (see Fig. 1 as an ex-ample). Therefore, reconstructing manifold surface meshes from measurement data meanwhile retaining their intrin-sic primitive structures in principle shall generate higher-quality approximation results than solely relying on poly-gons. input point clouds.
We argue that a method that solves the aforesaid prob-lem ought to satisfy the following objectives: 1) Structure-awareness. The reconstruction surfaces should faithfully keep the structural features of the input point cloud, for instance, the common primitives in CAD, meanwhile cor-rectly recovering the detailed geometry, and giving a high-fidelity approximation (e.g., the minimal Hausdorff dis-tance) to the target object. 2) Manifold guarantees. The output surface meshes should be oriented 2-manifold and watertight [35]. 3) Efficiency. The developed algorithm should be scalable to large-scale point clouds with an ac-ceptable computational complexity [3].
In this work, we develop a novel and efficient frame-work that takes the underlying geometric structures of point clouds into account when performing shape reconstruc-tion. Our method ensures high-quality outputs and aims to achieve the above objectives. The core of our algorithm lies in a faithful reconstruction of intrinsic primitive structures presented in CAD models, as opposed to the direct surface approximation based on piecewise planar primitives. We consider five representative types of primitives commonly found in modern CAD systems, including four quadrics (planes, cylinders, cones, spheres) and tori. We adopt a variational shape approximation to optimize the extracted primitives followed by mesh arrangement techniques to at-tain primitive patches. A patch is a manifold that consists of a set of connected triangle meshes. As the size of patches is typically smaller than that of facets, our method enables a more stable and efficient reconstruction process than plane-based ones. Moreover, we propose a patch pruning mecha-nism to further speed up the consecutive surface extraction process. This mechanism distinguishes patches as either active or inactive, allowing us to perform fast local colli-sion detection instead of a time-consuming global process-ing. Lastly, we select an optimal set of patches from the active candidate patches to assemble a reconstruction sur-face that respects the underlying structure of the object. To this end, we optimize a Binary Linear Programming (BLP) under hard constraints, as done in [35], to guarantee that the resulting surface is both manifold and watertight.
We perform extensive experiments to validate the effec-tiveness of our algorithm and compare it with state-of-the-art approaches using a variety of CAD models. Experimen-tal results evidence that our method outperforms competi-tors in terms of both approximation precision and recon-struction efficiency, while also preserving the intrinsic prim-itive structures of the input point clouds with much better fidelity. To summarize, the main technical contributions in-clude:
• An efficient structure-aware reconstruction method that produces accurate surface models while preserv-ing the underlying intrinsic primitive structures of the
• A patch pruning technique that avoids the time-consuming global collision detection and accelerates the surface extraction by a large margin.
• A patch-induced binary linear programming for as-sembling manifold and watertight surfaces from can-didate active patches, which significantly reduces the search space and helps achieve efficient and accurate surface reconstruction. 2.