Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel network, SVDFormer, to tackle two specific challenges in point cloud completion: understanding faithful global shapes from incomplete point clouds and generating high-accuracy local structures. Cur-rent methods either perceive shape patterns using only 3D coordinates or import extra images with well-calibrated in-trinsic parameters to guide the geometry estimation of the missing parts. However, these approaches do not always fully leverage the cross-modal self-structures available for accurate and high-quality point cloud completion. To this end, we first design a Self-view Fusion Network that lever-ages multiple-view depth image information to observe in-complete self-shape and generate a compact global shape.
†Co-corresponding authors
To reveal highly detailed structures, we then introduce a re-finement module, called Self-structure Dual-generator, in which we incorporate learned shape priors and geomet-ric self-similarities for producing new points. By perceiv-ing the incompleteness of each point, the dual-path de-sign disentangles refinement strategies conditioned on the structural type of each point. SVDFormer absorbs the wis-dom of self-structures, avoiding any additional paired in-formation such as color images with precisely calibrated camera intrinsic parameters. Comprehensive experiments indicate that our method achieves state-of-the-art perfor-mance on widely-used benchmarks. Code is available at https://github.com/czvvd/SVDFormer.
1.

Introduction
Point cloud completion plays an essential role in 3D vi-sion applications and remains an active research topic in re-cent years. To tackle this task, a variety of learning-based techniques have been proposed, of which many demonstrate encouraging results [40, 13, 43, 39, 31, 34, 41, 20, 46, 42].
However, the sparsity and large structural incompleteness of captured point clouds still limit the ability of these methods to produce satisfactory results.
We observe that there are two primary challenges in this task. The first challenge is that crucial semantic parts may be absent, resulting in a vast solution space for point-based networks [40, 31, 39, 46] to identify plausible global shapes and locate missing regions. Some alternative meth-ods attempt to address this issue by incorporating additional color images [44, 1, 47], but the paired images are hard to obtain, as well as the well-calibrated intrinsic parameters.
The second one is how to infer detailed structures. Some recent methods [31, 34] utilize skip-connections between multiple refinement steps, allowing them to better leverage learned shape pattern priors to iteratively recover finer de-tails. Some other methods prioritize preserving the original detail information by no-pooling encoding [46] or structural relational enhancement [16]. However, all above mentioned approaches typically employ a unified refinement strategy for all surface regions, which hinders the generation of ge-ometric details for various missing regions. By observing and analyzing the partial inputs, we find that the missing surface regions can be classified into two types. The first type lacks similar structures in the input shape, and their re-construction heavily relies on the learned shape prior. The second type is consistent with the local structures that are present in the partial input, and their recovery can be facili-tated by appropriate geometric regularity [45]. For instance,
LiDAR scans in KITTI [7] are highly sparse and contain limited information for generating fine details. Existing re-finement strategies tend to produce and preserve implausi-ble line-like shapes (see from Figure 7).
Based on the above observations, we propose a new neu-ral network for point cloud completion called SVDFormer.
Our method makes improvements by fully leveraging self-structure information in a coarse-to-fine paradigm.
First, similar to how a human would perceive and locate the missing areas of a physical object by observing it from different viewpoints, we aim to drive the neural network to absorb this knowledge by augmenting the data representa-tion. To achieve this, we design a Self-View Fusion Net-work (SVFNet) that learns an effective descriptor, well de-picting the global shape from both the point cloud data and depth maps captured from multiple viewpoints (see from
Figure 1 (a)). To better exploit such kind of cross-modal in-formation, we specifically introduce a feature fusion mod-ule to enhance the inter-view relations and improve the dis-criminative power of multi-view features.
Regarding the second challenge, our insight is to dis-entangle refinement strategies conditioned on the struc-tural type of each point to reveal detailed geometric struc-tures. Therefore, we design a Self-structure Dual-Generator (SDG) with a pair of parallel refinement units, called Struc-ture Analysis and Similarity Alignment, respectively. The former unit analyzes the generated coarse point clouds by explicitly encoding local incompleteness, which enables it to match learned geometric patterns of training data to infer underlying shapes. The Similarity Alignment unit finds the features of similar structures for every point, thus making it easier to refine its local region by mimicking the geometry of input local structures. With the aid of this dual-path de-sign, our method can generate reasonable results for differ-ent types of input shapes, including symmetrical synthetic models with various degrees of incompleteness and highly sparse real-world scans.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that SVDFormer state-of-the-art performance on widely-used achieves benchmarks. Our key contributions are listed below:
• We design a novel network called SVDFormer, which significantly improves point cloud completion in terms of global shape understanding and details recovery.
• We propose the novel Self-view Fusion Network (SVFNet) equipped with a feature fusion module to en-hance the multi-view and cross-modal feature, which can output a plausible global shape.
• We introduce a Self-structure Dual-Generator (SDG)
It enables our for refining the coarse completion. method to handle various kinds of incomplete shapes by jointly learning the local pattern priors and self-similarities of 3D shapes. 2.