Abstract
Images
Segmentation Detection
Ours
Cracks are usually curve-like structures that are the fo-cus of many computer-vision applications (e.g., road safety inspection and surface inspection of the industrial facili-ties). The existing pixel-based crack segmentation meth-ods rely on time-consuming and costly pixel-level annota-tions. And the object-based crack detection methods exploit the horizontal box to detect the crack without considering crack orientation, resulting in scale variation and intra-class variation. Considering this, we provide a new per-spective for crack detection that models the cracks as a se-ries of sub-cracks with the corresponding orientation. How-ever, the vanilla adaptation of the existing oriented object detection methods to the crack detection tasks will result in limited performance, due to the boundary discontinuity is-In this sue and the ambiguities in sub-crack orientation. paper, we propose a ﬁrst-of-its-kind oriented sub-crack de-tector, dubbed as CrackDet, which is derived from a novel piecewise angle deﬁnition, to ease the boundary disconti-nuity problem. And then, we propose a multi-branch an-gle regression loss for learning sub-crack orientation and variance together. Since there are no related benchmarks, we construct three fully annotated datasets, namely, ORC,
ONPP, and OCCSD, which involve various cracks in road pavement and industrial facilities. Experiments show that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art crack detectors. (a) Visualization of different perspectives for crack detection (b) Boundary discontinuity (c) Ambiguities in orientation
Figure 1. Cracks tend to be curve-like structures [77] in real-world applications. (a) We compare our orientation-based perspective with others for crack detection. (b) Boundary discontinuity issue in the existing 180-degree deﬁnition. (c) The sub-crack orientation is ambiguous in some cases due to the irregular sub-crack shape. 1.

Introduction
Crack is a type of defect that appears on the surfaces of many physical structures, e.g., the road pavement [41], the industrial facilities [8]. Inspecting and repairing cracks are crucial tasks for avoiding expansion of the harm to these structures [77]. Besides, a recent study reveals that recognizing the surface cracks caused by earthquakes in time can avoid secondary damage to people’s properties
∗Corresponding Author Email: chenjie@szu.edu.cn and lives [67]. However, manual inspection is costly, time-consuming, and prone to human error [34]. Hence, auto-matic image-based crack detection plays an essential role in a real-world application of crack identiﬁcation [22, 67].
Currently, image-based crack detection methods can be roughly divided into three categories [36]: patch-level clas-siﬁcation [4, 8], object-level detection [54, 31], and pixel-level crack segmentation [76, 49]. Although the ﬁrst two methods take less labeling cost than the last one, they can only provide a coarse crack localization. Moreover, we are
motivated by the fact that a crack is a line object that has a certain width from a local perspective [77]. Then, we are encouraged to start from an orientation-based perspective that models the cracks as a series of oriented sub-cracks (see
Fig. 1 (a)). The advantage of this perspective is three-fold: (1) eliminating the scale variation, (2) reducing the intra-class variation, and (3) taking less labeling cost than the segmentation methods. More speciﬁcally, in the case of our practice, the price and time cost of the pixel-level anno-tations are 15× and 30× higher than our oriented sub-crack annotations, respectively. Besides, considering real-world applications, existing works [33, 35] show great power by taking a detection-then-segmentation strategy, i.e., it ﬁrst identiﬁes and localizes cracks by a detector and then ob-tains crack details by segmentation-based methods. Hence, the detector based on our perspective can serve as a com-plement to segmentation-based methods, as it can provide a more ﬁne-grained localization (see Fig. 1 a).
However, it is difﬁcult to directly adopt the state-of-art oriented detectors [16, 39, 23, 37] to crack detection.
The reason is two-fold: (1) several existing works (e.g.,
ReDet [16], DRN [39]) simply ignore the boundary dis-continuity problem, and (2) although the remaining works make great efforts on the above problem, these works still suffer from ambiguity issue in the sub-crack orientation.
Among existing oriented detection methods, those detec-tors based on ﬁve parameters (x, y, h, w, θ) dominate [58], where (x, y) indicates the center point and (h, w, θ) de-notes height, width, and angle, respectively. As shown in
Fig. 1 (b), the boundary discontinuity problem indicates that small rotations for oriented objects around the angle period’s boundary result in a sudden sharp increase of loss
[61]. Moreover, Fig. 1 (c) provides some cases to illustrate the inherent ambiguities in sub-crack orientation. When the growth direction of a crack changes frequently, the orienta-tion of the sub-crack is unclear to judge, making it hard to learn regression functions for estimating orientation.
This paper starts from a new perspective for crack de-tection that models the cracks as a series of oriented sub-cracks. After that, we adopt CenterNet [73] as our baseline due to its simplicity. Next, we propose a new piecewise angle deﬁnition to ease the boundary discontinuity issue.
Based on our piecewise deﬁnition, we propose the Crack-Det that contains a parallel multi-branch architecture, each of which is responsible for predicting a ﬁxed range of an-gles. Then, to address the ambiguities in sub-crack orienta-tion, we propose a novel multi-branch angle regression loss, namely MAR Loss, which is based on Wasserstein distances
[1] for both angle regression and angle variance estimation.
The advantage of coupling CrackDet with MAR Loss is three-fold: (1) the ambiguities in sub-crack orientation can be captured to a certain extent. (2) The learned variance from each branch is beneﬁcial during the post-process. We acquire the estimated variances from each branch and obtain the detection results by variance voting. (3) Since crack ori-entation is signiﬁcant in a real-world application [38], the learned variances reveal the level of conﬁdence in the an-gle prediction, it can potentially help to judge the overall crack orientation. Our main contributions are summarized as follows: (1) To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst ones to start from an oriented sub-crack detection perspective for crack detection by modeling cracks as a series of sub-cracks with their inherent orientations. (2) Propose a ﬁrst-of-its-kind oriented sub-crack detec-tor, called as CrackDet, which stems from the proposed piecewise angle deﬁnition (see Sec. 3.1), to ease the bound-ary discontinuity issue. (3) Propose a multi-branch angle regression loss that en-ables CrackDet to capture ambiguities in sub-crack orienta-tion via jointly learning sub-crack orientation and the corre-sponding orientation variance (see Sec. 3.2 and 3.3). (4) A tale of three datasets has been constructed, namely,
ORC, ONPP, and OCCSD. These datasets contain orien-tation annotations of the sub-cracks in real-world indus-trial facilities and road pavements, to facilitate the research about oriented sub-crack detection. 2.