Abstract
Point-spread-function (PSF) engineering is a powerful computational imaging technique wherein a custom phase mask is integrated into an optical system to encode addi-tional information into captured images. Used in combi-nation with deep learning, such systems now offer state-of-the-art performance at monocular depth estimation, ex-tended depth-of-field imaging, lensless imaging, and other tasks. Inspired by recent advances in spatial light modula-tor (SLM) technology, this paper answers a natural ques-tion: Can one encode additional information and achieve superior performance by changing a phase mask dynam-ically over time? We first prove that the set of PSFs de-scribed by static phase masks is non-convex and that, as a result, time-averaged PSFs generated by dynamic phase masks are fundamentally more expressive. We then demon-strate, in simulation, that time-averaged dynamic (TiDy) phase masks can leverage this increased expressiveness to offer substantially improved monocular depth estimation and extended depth-of-field imaging performance. 1.

Introduction
Extracting depth information from an image is a critical task across a range of applications including autonomous driving [29, 33], robotics [23, 34], microscopy [7, 19], and augmented reality [31, 14]. To this end, researchers have developed engineered phase masks and apertures which serve to encode depth information into an image [12, 25].
To optimize these phase masks, recent works have exploited deep learning: By simultaneously optimizing a phase mask and a reconstruction algorithm “end-to-end learning” is able to dramatically improve system performance [32, 26].
Figure 1. Time-averaged Dynamic PSFs Top: Phase mask se-quence that was optimized to perform simultaneous extended depth-of-field imaging and monocular depth estimation. Middle:
Proposed TiDy PSFs at specific depths. Bottom left: Depth esti-mation and all-in-focus imaging performance improve as one aver-ages over more phase masks. Bottom right: Depth-encoded image and reconstructed depth map.
Most existing works have focused on learning or opti-mizing a single phase mask for passive depth perception.
We conjecture that this restriction leaves much room for improvement. Perhaps by using an SLM to introduce a se-quence of phase masks over time, one could do much better.
Supporting this idea is the fact, which we prove in The-orem 3, that the set of PSFs described by a single phase mask is non-convex. This implies that time-averaged PSFs, which span the convex hull of this set, can be significantly more expressive.
In this work, we exploit the PSF non-convexity by developing a multi-phase mask end-to-end op-timization approach for learning a sequence of phase masks whose PSFs are averaged over time.
This work’s central contributions are as follows:
*These authors contributed equally to this work
• We prove the set of PSFs generated by a single phase
mask is non-convex. Thus, dynamic phase-masks offer a fundamentally larger design space.
• We extend the end-to-end learning optics and algo-rithm design framework to design a dynamic set of phase masks.
• We demonstrate, that time-averaged in simulation,
PSFs can achieve superior monocular depth estimation and extended depth-of-field imaging performance. 2.