Abstract
We present a Multimodal Backdoor Defense technique
TIJO (Trigger Inversion using Joint Optimization). Recent work [48] has demonstrated successful backdoor attacks on multimodal models for the Visual Question Answering task. Their dual-key backdoor trigger is split across two modalities (image and text), such that the backdoor is ac-tivated if and only if the trigger is present in both modali-ties. We propose TIJO that defends against dual-key attacks through a joint optimization that reverse-engineers the trig-ger in both the image and text modalities. This joint op-timization is challenging in multimodal models due to the disconnected nature of the visual pipeline which consists of an offline feature extractor, whose output is then fused with the text using a fusion module. The key insight enabling the joint optimization in TIJO is that the trigger inversion needs to be carried out in the object detection box feature space as opposed to the pixel space. We demonstrate the effec-tiveness of our method on the TrojVQA benchmark, where
TIJO improves upon the state-of-the-art unimodal methods from an AUC of 0.6 to 0.92 on multimodal dual-key back-doors. Furthermore, our method also improves upon the unimodal baselines on unimodal backdoors. We present ab-lation studies and qualitative results to provide insights into our algorithm such as the critical importance of overlaying the inverted feature triggers on all visual features during trigger inversion. The prototype implementation of TIJO is available at https://github.com/SRI-CSL/TIJO. 1.

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adver-sarial attacks [47, 1, 16, 24]. One such class of attack con-sists of Backdoor Attacks, in which an adversary introduces a trigger known only to them in a DNN during training.
Such a backdoored DNN will behave normally with typi-*Corresponding author: indranil.sur@sri.com
Figure 1. (Top) A dual-key backdoor attack for multimodal mod-els [48], which is designed to activate if and only if the trigger is present in both the modalities. Such backdoors cannot be detected by unimodal defenses. (Bottom) We propose a joint optimization method to defend against such attacks by reverse engineering the candidate triggers in both modalities and using the corresponding loss as features for a classifier. cal in-distribution inputs but perform poorly (e.g. produce targeted misclassifications) on inputs stamped with a prede-fined trigger designed by the adversary [50, 21, 30].
Recent work [48, 7] has introduced backdoors in multi-modal domains such as Visual Question Answering (VQA) and Fake News Detection [7, 48]. In prior work [48], we have introduced a Dual-Key Backdoor Attack (shown in
Figure 1), where the trigger is inserted in both the image and text modalities in such a manner that the backdoor is ac-tivated only when both modalities contain the trigger. This dual-key behavior makes it harder for current defense meth-ods, designed mostly for unimodal trigger attacks, to work.
There has been significant work developing defenses against backdoor attacks in the visual domain, in particu-lar for the image classification task [45, 49, 6, 23]. Recent works have also explored defense in natural language pro-cessing domains [38, 43, 34]. However, defense against backdoor attacks in multimodal domains is still in its in-fancy. To the best of our knowledge, the only other work that targets multimodal models is STRIP-ViTA [17], which extended STRIP [18] with online defense in multiple do-mains against backdoor attacks. Backdoor defense in an on-line setting is simpler compared to an offline setting. These methods are online monitoring techniques for identifying whether a given input is clean or poisoned with the back-In contrast, offline backdoor detection is a door trigger. model verification approach that needs to detect whether a given model is backdoored or not with access to the model and a few clean examples. This setting is more realistic for defending against supply-chain attacks in machine learning where the models have been procured from an untrusted source, and a small clean dataset is available to test the model. We focus on multimodal defense in such an offline setting.
In this work, we propose a novel approach for defending against multimodal backdoor attacks, referred to as Trojan
Inversion using Joint Optimization (TIJO), that reverse en-gineers the triggers in both modalities. Our approach is motivated by the Universal Adversarial Trigger (UAT) [47] that was proposed to identify naturally occurring universal triggers in pre-trained NLP models and has been extended in earlier works to identify trojan triggers in NLP models.
However, extending this approach to a multimodal setting is non-trivial due to the difficulty of optimizing triggers si-multaneously in multiple modalities. Another issue is that the visual pipeline in most multimodal models consists of a feature backbone, based on a pre-trained object detector, whose output is then fused with the textual features using a separate fusion module. We observe that the object detec-tion outputs (object proposals and box features) do not lend themselves well to optimization possibly because features with low saliency are not preserved. Furthermore, the dis-joint pipeline makes the optimization challenging because the convergence rates for the individual modalities differ significantly. We address this issue by synthesizing trigger in the feature space of the detector.
We evaluate TIJO on the TrojVQA dataset [48] that con-sists of over 800 VQA models spanning across 4 feature backbones and 10 model architectures. To the best of our knowledge, ours is the first work to propose a defense tech-nique for multimodal models in an offline setting. Our results indicate strong improvement over prior unimodal methods. Our contributions are as follows:
• We present a novel approach for Multimodal Backdoor defense referred to as TIJO.
• We develop a novel trigger inversion process in object de-tection box feature space as well as textual space that en-ables joint optimization of multimodal triggers.
• We demonstrate TIJO on the TrojVQA dataset and show that trigger inversion in both modalities is necessary to effectively defend against multimodal backdoor attacks.
We compare against existing baselines and show substan-0.92). tial gains in AUC (0.6
• We show that TIJO improves upon our selected set of state-of-the-art unimodal methods in the detection of uni-modal backdoors indicating that our proposed method is modality-agnostic.
→
• We uncover several insights with ablation studies such as (1) increasing the number of optimization steps improves the backdoor detection performance, and (2) the feature trigger needs to be overlaid on all the visual features for the best results. 2.