Abstract
Modeling and synthesizing low-light raw noise is a fun-damental problem for computational photography and im-age processing applications. Although most recent works have adopted physics-based models to synthesize noise, the signal-independent noise in low-light conditions is far more complicated and varies dramatically across camera sen-sors, which is beyond the description of these models. To address this issue, we introduce a new perspective to syn-thesize the signal-independent noise by a generative model.
Specifically, we synthesize the signal-dependent and signal-independent noise in a physics- and learning-based manner, respectively. In this way, our method can be considered as a general model, that is, it can simultaneously learn different noise characteristics for different ISO levels and generalize to various sensors. Subsequently, we present an effective multi-scale discriminator termed Fourier transformer dis-criminator (FTD) to distinguish the noise distribution accu-rately. Additionally, we collect a new low-light raw denois-ing (LRD) dataset for training and benchmarking. Qualita-tive validation shows that the noise generated by our pro-posed noise model can be highly similar to the real noise in terms of distribution. Furthermore, extensive denoising ex-periments demonstrate that our method performs favorably against state-of-the-art methods on different sensors.
Figure 1. Examples of generated and denoised raw images from our proposed method. (a) Clean raw image, (b) Real noisy raw image, (c) Generated noisy raw image from our proposed noise model, (d) Denoised raw image of the denoise network [10] trained on the image generated by our noise model. Our model can generate noise at different ISO levels by a single learned noise model. The results of the visualization and quantitative metric
Kullback-Leibler divergence (KLD) demonstrate that the distribu-tion of the synthetic noise is close to the real noise distribution.
Noise at high ISO levels drowns out the signal, resulting in unsat-isfactory image denoising. 1.

Introduction
Low-light raw denoising is an important yet challeng-ing problem for the increasingly widespread computational photography [53]. Due to the powerful computational ca-pability of deep learning, the learning-based low-light raw denoising algorithms have shown great superiority and be-come the mainstream manner [10, 21] in recent years. How-ever, since the standard paradigm of deep learning is to learn a mapping from the low-light noisy raw image to its normal-† Corresponding authors. light counterpart, this leads to a reliance on the large-scale dataset of real-world noisy-clean raw image pairs, which is extremely tedious and labor-intensive to collect.
A naive strategy is to synthesize the low-light noisy raw images to obtain more paired training data. Existing noise synthesis methods can be roughly categorized into physics-based noise models and Deep Neural Network (DNN)-based noise models.
Physics-based noise modeling [23, 54, 52] is the most commonly used noise synthesis method in low-light condi-tions, which obtains the statistical distribution of different noise sources by analyzing the physical process of cam-era sensor imaging. However, noise sources on different camera sensors vary widely due to differences in circuit de-sign and signal processing techniques, making it impossible for physics-based methods to extract and model all noise sources accurately. Moreover, each noise source’s proper-ties and statistical behavior vary significantly at different exposure times or ISO levels, making physics-based meth-ods tedious and error-prone. All these limitations make it impossible for a physics-based method to achieve accurate noise modeling on multiple camera sensors.
DNN-based noise modeling [1, 9] learns to synthesize noise from real captured datasets with deep generative net-works. Although the existing deep models show promising synthetic results on raw images due to their powerful rep-resentation capability, some previous studies [58, 44] have revealed that they perform poorly on extremely low-light raw images.
In this paper, we present a new perspective on synthe-sizing realistic low-light raw noise. Specifically, instead of directly synthesizing noise with generative networks, we separate the noise synthesis process into two compo-nents, i.e., signal-dependent and signal-independent, which are implemented through a physics-based manner and a learning-based manner, respectively. We employ a pre-trained denoise network during the training procedure to transfer the synthesized and real noisy raw images into a nearly noise-free image space to perform image domain alignment. Meanwhile, to better distinguish the synthesized and real noise, we present an effective multi-scale discrim-inator, namely Fourier transformer discriminator (FTD), to perform the noise domain alignment. In addition, we col-lect a new low-light raw denoising (LRD) dataset for train-ing and benchmarking. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our noise model performs favorably against existing state-of-the-art noise models on different camera sensors.
Fig. 1 shows examples of the synthetic noisy raw images and the corresponding denoising results trained on the syn-thetic noisy raw images.
In conclusion, our contributions can be summarized into three aspects:
• We propose a general noise model with separated syn-thesis processes to express the noise terms of accord-ing characteristics, enabling the noise model to imitate accurate low-light raw noise on different sensors.
• We establish an effective multi-scale discriminator framework, namely Fourier transformer discriminator (FTD), which encourages the generator to favor solu-tions that reside on the manifold of real low-light raw noise distributions.
• We collect a new large-scale dataset for low-light raw denoising benchmarking and researching. 2.