Abstract 1.

Introduction
Mimicking realistic dynamics in 3D garment anima-tions is a challenging task due to the complex nature of multi-layered garments and the variety of outer forces involved. Existing approaches mostly focus on single-layered garments driven by only human bodies and strug-In this paper, we pro-gle to handle general scenarios. pose a novel data-driven method, called LayersNet, to model garment-level animations as particle-wise interac-tions in a micro physics system. We improve simulation efficiency by representing garments as patch-level parti-cles in a two-level structural hierarchy. Moreover, we in-troduce a novel Rotation Equivalent Transformation with
Rotation Invariant Attention that leverage the rotation in-variance and additivity of physics systems to better model outer forces. To verify the effectiveness of our approach and bridge the gap between experimental environments and real-world scenarios, we introduce a new challenging dataset, D-LAYERS, containing 700K frames of dynam-ics of 4,900 combinations of multi-layered garments driven by human bodies and randomly sampled wind. Our Lay-ersNet achieves superior performance both quantitatively and qualitatively. Project page: www.mmlab-ntu.com/ project/layersnet/index.html . 3D garment animation has been an active and important topic in computer graphics and machine learning, due to its great potential in various downstream tasks including virtual reality, virtual try-on, gaming and film production.
However, realistic 3D garment animation remains an open research problem due to the intrinsic challenge of modeling garments dynamics.
Specifically, the dynamics of garments are jointly af-fected by both internal and external driving factors. For internal factors, while garments vary in topologies and ma-terials, different topologies and materials result in drasti-cally different dynamics. Moreover, in practice, humans usually wear multiple garments in a layered manner, and such multi-layered garments further complicate the prob-lem. For example, the rigid outer layer of a jacket can press against a softer inner dress, while the inner layer of a rigid t-shirt tries to maintain its shape against outer softer clothing.
As for external factors, in addition to the movement of hu-man body, gravity, wind and friction also significantly influ-ence the dynamics of garments in different ways. Given the complexity of 3D garment animation, previous approaches
[40, 38, 20, 24] tend to simplify the problem, considering only single-layered garments with the movement of human body being the only external driving factor. Though being
effective in such a simplified setting, their applicability in real-life scenarios is significantly reduced. Moreover, they often resort to garment-specific designs, which further lim-its their generality across garments with different topologies and materials.
In this paper, we propose a novel data-driven method,
LayersNet, for 3D garment animation, which is inspired by the observation that although different driving factors, gar-ment topologies and materials lead to significantly varying garments behaviors in the macro view, at the micro level the dynamics of particles with same attributes share simi-larities. Therefore, LayersNet realizes a Transformer-based simulation system to capture system dynamics via particle-wise interactions, where garments, human body as well as other external factors are all represented by particles, mak-ing LayersNet agnostic to specific garment topology, the number of layered garments, and the set of considered ex-ternal factors. In practice, we also adopt a two-level struc-tural hierarchy in LayersNet, where garments are made of patches, and patches consist of vertices of a fixed config-uration. Patches are thus treated as garments’ basic parti-cles, and LayersNet only needs to learn the interactions be-tween patches, resulting in a significant reduction of com-putational complexity.
To further improve the effectiveness of LayersNet, we also propose novel Rotation Invariant Attention and Ro-tation Equivalent Transformation, which utilize the prop-erties of rotation invariance and additivity of physics sys-tems, to ease the modeling complexity of external factors.
Specifically, the Rotation Invariant Attention ensures that
LayersNet equivalently attends to interactions under differ-ent rotations and obeys the rotation invariance of the sys-tem. While external factors can influence garment particles in diverse directions, the behaviors of interaction forces re-main consistent in local canonical spaces, which are under the directions of forces or the normals of obstacles’ sur-faces. For instance, the wind blows garments along the force directions, while the meshes of human skin consis-tently push other objects outside of the body. The proposed
Rotation Equivalent Transformation thus transforms high-dimensional features to the local canonical space to reduce the redundant rotation information and capture interactions’ semantics, followed by transforming features back to the global space for aggregations. In this way, it enables Lay-ersNet to effectively exchange semantics across multiple complicated external factors.
To verify the effectiveness of LayersNet in more gen-eral cases and bridge the gap between experimental envi-ronments and real-world applications, we introduce a new challenging dataset called D-LAYERS, Dynamic muLti-lAYerEd gaRmentS dataset. The dataset focuses on multi-layered garment animation driven by both human body and wind. Multi-layered garments in D-LAYERS are prepared as combinations of inner and outer clothes, each with differ-ent attribute values, such as bend stiffness and frictions. All garments on the same human body interact with each other, constrained by the physics laws and simultaneously affected by the wind with randomly sampled direction and strength.
D-LAYERS contains 4,900 different combinations of multi-layered garments and 700k frames in total, with a maxi-mum sequence length of 600 frames. Experiments on D-LAYERS demonstrate that LayersNet outperforms existing methods and is more generalizable in complex settings.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows: 1)
We propose a Transformer-based simulation method, Lay-ersNet, with a novel rotation equivalent transformation for 3D garment animation that uses rotation invariance and additivity of physics systems to uniformly capture and process interactions among garment parts, differ-ent garments, as well as garments against driving fac-2) We further propose D-LAYERS, a large-scale tors. and new dynamic dataset for 3D garment animation. The dataset and code are available at www.mmlab-ntu.com/ project/layersnet/index.html . 2.