Abstract
This paper aims to explain the generalization of deep-fake detectors from the novel perspective of multi-order in-teractions among visual concepts. Specifically, we propose three hypotheses: 1. Deepfake detectors encode multi-order interactions among visual concepts, in which the low-order interactions usually have substantially negative contributions to deepfake detection. 2. Deepfake detec-tors with better generalization abilities tend to encode low-order interactions with fewer negative contributions. 3.
Generalized deepfake detectors usually weaken the nega-tive contributions of low-order interactions by suppressing their strength. Accordingly, we design several mathemat-ical metrics to evaluate the effect of low-order interaction for deepfake detectors. Extensive comparative experiments are conducted, which verify the soundness of our hypothe-ses. Based on the analyses, we further propose a generic method, which directly reduces the toxic effects of low-order interactions to improve the generalization of deepfake de-tectors to some extent. 1.

Introduction
Deepfake detection has attracted increasing attention in recent years [39, 32, 13, 22, 41]. However, the generaliza-tion of deepfake detectors is still a considerable challenge in this field. Specifically, deepfake detectors with outstand-ing performance on learned datasets usually do not gener-alize well to unseen datasets. Previous studies on improv-ing the generalization mainly focused on two perspectives.
Some studies [39, 29, 10, 9] proposed methods to synthesize new face forgeries to mimic deepfakes, in order to enrich the diversity of artifact features in images. Some studies
[36, 58, 4, 57, 20] empirically designed specific modules to concentrate on more generalized forgery traces. However, these works usually reflected human’s understanding of the
*Corresponding author.
Figure 1. An intuitive understanding of our motivation. Given a manipulated image, the realism of the image usually can not be identified faithfully when preserving a little information. In corre-spondence, as the amount of information on the image increases, the realism of the image can be concluded more confidently. In this paper, we decompose such effects of the different amounts of information on the image from a novel view of multi-order inter-actions among visual concepts. To this end, three hypotheses are proposed and verified, showing that deepfake detectors often fail to learn reliable and generalized artifact representations from lim-ited information. generalized artifact features, which failed to diagnose and explore the generalization mechanism of the learned repre-sentations inside deepfake detectors.
Different from previous studies, we aim to explain the generalization of deepfake detectors by diagnosing the learned representations from a novel game-theoretical view.
Specifically, we aim to explore the relationship between the generalization of deepfake detectors and the multi-order in-teractions [54] among the learned visual concepts on forg-eries.
In this paper, visual concepts represent meaningful im-age regions, e.g., object parts like eyes, noses, or mouths of genuine/fake human faces. Originally proposed by Zhang et al. [54], the multi-order interaction among different vi-sual concepts can be understood as follows. Deepfake de-tectors usually do not indicate forgeries based on each vi-sual concept individually. Instead, different visual concepts may cooperate with each other to form a decisive interaction pattern to distinguish fake images, such as the inconsistency
between the genuine and forged areas [59]. In particular, the order of the interaction among these visual concepts repre-sents the scale of the context when they collaborate with each other. For example, as shown in Figure 1, given a cer-tain coalition of visual concepts on an input image, the low-order interaction represents the extra award caused by the collaboration of these visual concepts with a simple context.
In correspondence, the high-order interaction represents the extra award caused by the collaboration of these visual con-cepts with a complex context.
Intuitively, different orders of interactions among visual concepts may have different effects on the task of deepfake detection. To this end, we propose three hypotheses and de-sign several mathematical metrics to evaluate the impact of multi-order interactions on the generalization performance of deepfake detectors. Then, these evaluation results are used to verify the proposed hypotheses.
Hypothesis 1: Deepfake detectors encode multi-order interactions among visual concepts, in which the low-order interactions usually have substantially negative contributions to deepfake detection. As described above, the low-order interaction reflects the simple collaboration among a few visual concepts. Such learned knowledge may not benefit the task of deepfake detection due to the limited representations. For instance, as shown in Figure 1, when only a small number of patches are available on images, it is difficult to tell the differences between fake and genuine images. In this scenario, deepfake detectors tend to easily learn biased representations of artifact features.
Hypothesis 2: Deepfake detectors with better gener-alization abilities tend to encode low-order interactions with fewer negative contributions. Under the premise that learning low-order interactions among visual concepts is detrimental to deepfake detection, such biased representa-tions may cause unexpected results when facing new forg-eries, leading to a performance drop on the cross-dataset evaluation. To this end, we believe that when the general-ization ability of deepfake detectors is improved, the nega-tive contributions of low-order interactions tend to be less.
Hypothesis 3: Generalized deepfake detectors usu-ally weaken the negative contributions of low-order in-teractions by suppressing their strength. Based on the understanding of hypothesis 2, directly suppressing the strength of the learned low-order interactions seems to be an effective way to weaken the negative contributions to deep-fake detection.
In other words, when deepfake detectors barely learn low-order interactions among visual concepts, they should encode more generalized artifact features to dis-tinguish forgeries.
Methods: We propose several metrics to evaluate the effect of multi-order interactions encoded in deepfake de-tectors. For hypothesis 1, we design a metric to attribute the contributions of different orders of interactions to the task of deepfake detection. For hypothesis 2, the metric is used to evaluate how low-order interactions contribute dif-ferently to the task of deepfake detection among deepfake detectors with different generalization abilities. For hypoth-esis 3, we aim to measure the strength of different orders of interactions learned by deepfake detectors. In this way, we conduct extensive experiments to verify the above hypothe-ses with the proposed metrics.
Furthermore, based on our understanding, we then pro-pose a generic method to improve the generalization abil-ities of deepfake detectors across different backbones.
Specifically, we directly remove the part of the output score related to low-order interactions for each input image dur-ing the inference process of deepfake detectors. In this way, the toxic effects of low-order interactions can be reduced to some extent, so as to improve the generalization abilities of deepfake detectors without retraining them.
Contributions of this paper can be summarized as fol-lows. 1) We propose to explore the generalization mech-anism of the learned representations inside deepfake de-tectors from a novel game-theoretical view. 2) We de-sign several mathematical metrics to quantify the effect of multi-order interaction among visual concepts for the task of deepfake detection. 3) Three hypotheses are proposed and verified, which reveal the toxic effect of low-order in-teractions on the performance of deepfake detectors. 4) We further propose a novel strategy to directly reduce the toxic effects of low-order interactions in the inference process, which improves the generalization abilities of various deep-fake detectors to some extent. 2.