Abstract
Face Image Quality Assessment (FIQA) lays the founda-tion for ensuring the stability and accuracy of face recogni-tion systems. However, existing FIQA methods mainly for-mulate quality relationships within the training set to yield quality scores, ignoring the generalization problem caused by ethnic quality bias between the training and test sets.
Domain adaptation presents a potential solution to mitigate the bias, but if FIQA is treated essentially as a regression task, it will be limited by the challenge of feature scaling in transfer learning. Additionally, how to guarantee source risk is also an issue due to the lack of ground-truth labels of the source domain for FIQA. This paper presents the first at-tempt in the field of FIQA to address these challenges with a novel Ethnic-Quality-Bias Mitigating (EQBM) framework.
Specifically, to eliminate the restriction of scalar regres-sion, we first compute the Likert-scale quality probability distributions as source domain annotations. Furthermore, we design an easy-to-hard training scheduler based on the inter-domain uncertainty and intra-domain quality margin as well as the ranking-based domain adversarial network to enhance the effectiveness of transfer learning and fur-ther reduce the source risk in domain adaptation. Exten-sive experiments demonstrate that the EQBM significantly mitigates the quality bias and improves the generalization capability of FIQA across races on different datasets. 1.

Introduction
To maintain stable accuracy for face recognition systems in the wild deployment circumstance, numerous Face Im-age Quality Assessment (FIQA) techniques have been de-veloped [38]. The existing FIQA schemes build their ap-proaches on the assumption that the training and test data share similar distributions, and have shown promising out-comes on popular evaluation benchmarks [2, 21, 25, 33, 31,
Figure 1. Illustration of the two different FIQA schemes. Pre-vious FIQA schemes focus on formulating new quality relation-ships within the source domain, which may lead to ethnic quality
In bias due to the gap between the source and target domains. contrast, in our proposed technique, the intra-domain margin and inter-domain uncertainty are involved in amending quality predic-tions of the target domain, which mitigates the ethnic quality bias. 41, 46, 52]. However, recently Babnik et al. [4] and Terh¨orst et al. [45] emphasize the potential problem of ethnic qual-ity bias that leads to generalization challenges when FIQA models are deployed in real-world scenarios with different demographic distributions.
On the one hand, the challenge stems from the un-balanced demographic attributes in datasets.
For in-stance, mainstream FIQA training datasets, such as CASIA-Webface [53], MS-Celeb-1M [20], and VGGFace2 [34], are gathered from the Internet and contain people with unbal-anced ethnic distributions. These datasets are overwhelm-ingly composed of people with Caucasian attributes, with over 74% of the samples with this demographic. Such a dramatic difference between the Caucasian (i.e. source do-main) and other races (i.e., target domain) may lead to do-main shifts in the deployment of FIQA models. Collect-ing and labeling more data along the underrepresented at-tributes for these million-scale training sets may be a solu-tion but it is impractical. Moreover, the collection of face images would be involved in private legal issues across dif-ferent districts. On the other hand, existing FIQA meth-ods [2, 21, 25, 31, 46] focus on exploring new quality con-sistency relationships between quality scores and the per-formance of face recognition models, largely escaping the research attention for amending quality scores against eth-nic quality bias. Therefore, there appears to be a new chal-lenging and meaningful problem: how to utilize unbalanced training data to reduce ethnic quality bias?
A potential solution is to adopt unsupervised domain adaptation to tackle the FIQA task via leveraging the source data to learn a robust quality regressor for the target do-main [12, 14, 26]. Unfortunately, the majority of current domain adaptation schemes have not attained favorable ad-vances solely for regression [14]. Moreover, how to guar-antee the source risk of domain adaptation without ground truth labels in the FIQA task is also a challenge [28].
In this work, we build a novel Ethnic-Quality-Bias Miti-gating (EQBM) framework based on the curriculum domain adaptation to address these issues. Herein, we describe the core idea of our framework in Fig. 1. Different from previ-ous FIQA techniques [6, 33, 52] that focus on formulating new quality relationships within the source domain to yield quality scores, our EQBM framework explores the intra-domain quality margin and inter-domain uncertainty in the curriculum design to amend quality scores, showing signif-icant advantages over previous works on evaluation bench-marks for mitigating the ethnic quality bias.
The main contributions of this work are threefold:
• We present the first attempt to address the challenging yet meaningful problem of ethnic quality bias via do-main adaptation in the field of FIQA, which provides new insights into developing robust FIQA schemes.
• We devise a new framework to amend quality scores against the bias, in which we boost the potential of do-main adaptation for migrating the ethnic quality bias via the Likert-scale quality probabilities and quality ranking.
• We propose a novel curriculum domain adaptation ap-proach, a sequential adaptation strategy, which adapts from the easier samples to harder ones, in which the intra-domain quality margin and inter-domain uncer-tainty are coupled for the curriculum design. 2.