Abstract
Deepfake detection remains a challenging task due to the difficulty of generalizing to new types of forgeries. This problem primarily stems from the overfitting of existing de-tection methods to forgery-irrelevant features and method-specific patterns. The latter has been rarely studied and not well addressed by previous works. This paper presents a novel approach to address the two types of overfitting issues by uncovering common forgery features. Specifically, we first propose a disentanglement framework that decomposes image information into three distinct components: forgery-irrelevant, method-specific forgery, and common forgery features. To ensure the decoupling of method-specific and common forgery features, a multi-task learning strategy is employed, including a multi-class classification that pre-dicts the category of the forgery method and a binary clas-sification that distinguishes the real from the fake. Addi-tionally, a conditional decoder is designed to utilize forgery features as a condition along with forgery-irrelevant fea-tures to generate reconstructed images. Furthermore, a contrastive regularization technique is proposed to encour-age the disentanglement of the common and specific forgery features. Ultimately, we only utilize the common forgery features for the purpose of generalizable deepfake detec-tion. Extensive evaluations demonstrate that our framework can perform superior generalization than current state-of-the-art methods. 1.

Introduction
Deepfake technology has gained significant attention in recent years due to its ability to generate highly realistic videos. While deepfake has the potential to be used for various purposes, including entertainment and marketing, it has also been misused for illegal purposes. The use of deepfake to create false content can compromise people’s
∗Equal contribution
†Corresponding Author
Figure 1: Comparison among different classification meth-ods. The first is a direct classification that uses whole fea-tures. The second approach eliminates content features to prevent overfitting to forgery-irrelevant features. Our ap-proach, the third one, not only removes the influence of con-tent but also prevents overfitting to specific forgery patterns by uncovering common features. privacy, spread misinformation, and erode trust in digital media, resulting in severe outcomes like reputational harm, incitement of violence, and political instability.
As a result, developing a reliable and effective deepfake detection algorithm is vitally essential. Recently, a large number of detectors [58, 25, 37, 52, 36, 55, 8] have been proposed for deepfake. Existing detectors generally per-form well when the training and testing data are created using the same forgery techniques. However, in real-world applications, the testing data may be created using unknown procedures, leading to differences between the training and testing data and resulting in poor detection performance.
This phenomenon, known as the generalization problem in deepfake detection, presents a significant challenge to the
practical use of current detection methods.
Currently, an increasing number of studies are dedicated to tackling the issue of generalization in deepfake detection.
These works typically utilize blending artifacts [23, 41] or frequency artifacts [28, 30], and some employ adversarial training to synthesize challenging forgeries [7]. However, these approaches are limited in their reliance on predefined forgery patterns. For instance, Face X-ray [23] assumes the presence of a blending region in the forged image, which could potentially curtail the effectiveness of the approach when generalized to novel and unseen forgeries. In addi-tion, these methods consider the entire feature space when addressing the problem, which could be disrupted by irrel-evant factors such as background [27] and identity [13].
To address the above challenges, we adopt the perspec-tive of content and style [20] and formulate the problem of deepfake as an integration of two distinct components: content and fingerprint. The content in deepfake refers to elements, e.g., the background, identity, and facial appear-ance, which are not directly related to the forgery. In con-trast, the fingerprint represents the traits that are related to the forgery. The challenge, then, becomes how to effec-tively disentangle these two components and use only the forgery-related fingerprint for detection.
Several recent studies [51, 18, 27] attempt to address the generalization problem through disentanglement tech-niques. However, limited generalization capability remains a challenge in many cases. One main reason is the over-reliance on method-specific patterns in most disentangle-ment methods, which only aim to eliminate the influence of content. However, these methods may still learn patterns that are unique to a specific forgery method, thereby limit-ing their generalization performance.
To address this issue, we propose a novel disentangle-ment framework that differs from existing approaches (See
Fig. 1). Our framework prevents overfitting to both content and specific forgery patterns. To achieve this, we employ a multi-task disentanglement framework and a conditional decoder to disentangle the input into content and fingerprint components. Moreover, we introduce a contrastive regu-larization technique to disentangle the fingerprint features into specific and common features. The specific features represent method-specific forgeries, while the common fea-tures are shared across different forgery methods. In our ap-proach, only the common features are utilized for detection, which improves the generalization ability of the model. To validate our idea, we conduct a t-SNE visualization [46] in Fig. 2, demonstrating that the baseline and our specific components actually learn method-specific texture, while our common components are able to capture the common features across forgeries. Furthermore, the content does not differentiate between real and fake images, as expected.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel multi-task disentanglement frame-work to address two main challenges that contribute to the generalization problem in deepfake detection: overfitting to irrelevant features and overfitting to method-specific textures. By uncovering common fea-tures, our framework aims to enhance the generaliza-tion ability of the model.
• We propose a conditional decoder that helps disentan-gle forgery-irrelevant and forgery features, as well as a contrastive regularization technique that facilitates the disentanglement of common and specific forgery features. By utilizing these technologies, we aim to achieve improved disentanglement.
• Extensive experiments show that our framework can outperform the performance of current state-of-the-art methods in unseen testing datasets, demonstrating its effectiveness in generalization. 2.