Abstract
Without manually annotated identities, unsupervised multi-object trackers are inferior to learning reliable fea-ture embeddings. It causes the similarity-based inter-frame association stage also be error-prone, where an uncertainty problem arises. The frame-by-frame accumulated uncer-tainty prevents trackers from learning the consistent feature embedding against time variation. To avoid this uncertainty problem, recent self-supervised techniques are adopted, whereas they failed to capture temporal relations. The inter-frame uncertainty still exists. In fact, this paper argues that though the uncertainty problem is inevitable, it is possi-ble to leverage the uncertainty itself to improve the learned consistency in turn. Specifically, an uncertainty-based met-ric is developed to verify and rectify the risky associations.
The resulting accurate pseudo-tracklets boost learning the feature consistency. And accurate tracklets can incorpo-rate temporal information into spatial transformation. This paper proposes a tracklet-guided augmentation strategy to simulate the tracklet’s motion, which adopts a hierarchi-cal uncertainty-based sampling mechanism for hard sam-ple mining. The ultimate unsupervised MOT framework, namely U2MOT, is proven effective on MOT-Challenges and VisDrone-MOT benchmark. U2MOT achieves a SOTA performance among the published supervised and unsuper-vised trackers. 1.

Introduction
Multi-object tracking (MOT) [31, 4, 46] has been widely deployed in real-world applications, including surveillance analysis [32, 56], autonomous driving [13, 38], intelligent robots [34, 3], etc. The goal of MOT task is to detect all tar-get objects and simultaneously keep their respective feature embeddings consistent, regardless of the change of their shapes and angles over a period of time [46, 55]. However, the core issue of unsupervised MOT task is lacking the an-notated ID-supervision to confirm the consistency of a cer-*This work was done when Kai Liu worked as a research intern at Al-ibaba DAMO Academy. Email: kail@zju.edu.cn.
†Corresponding author. Email: zhihang.fzh@alibaba-inc.com.
Figure 1: Method Comparison. a) Previous meth-ods utilize pseudo-labeled (PL) adjacent frames or ran-domly augmented (RA) samples. b) Our method adopts uncertainty-aware tracklet-labeling (UTL) to maintain con-sistent pseudo-tracklets, and exploits tracklet-guided aug-mentation (TGA) to improve the embedding consistency tain target, especially when its shape and angle are varied over time [19, 43, 24, 22, 37]. When training an unsuper-vised tracker, since the learned feature embedding is unre-liable, the similarity-based association stage is error-prone.
Propagating pseudo identities frame-by-frame leads to un-certainty in the resulting pseudo-tracklets, which accumu-lates in per-frame associations. This prevents trackers from learning a consistent feature embedding [43, 24].
To avoid this problem, self-supervised techniques [24, 37, 52] are utilized to generate augmented samples with perfectly-accurate identities. However, these commonly-used methods merely take a single frame for augmentation, while the inter-frame temporal relation is totally ignored.
It usually leads to sub-optimal performance [55]. The uncertainty problem seems inevitable but remains under-explored. In fact, we argue that the uncertainty can be lever-aged to maintain consistency in turn, as shown in Fig. 1.
First, uncertainty can guide the construction of pseudo-tracklets. When the similarity-based inter-frame object as-sociation is inaccurate, we propose to introduce a quan-tified uncertainty measure to find out the possibly wrong associations and further re-associate them. Specifically, we find that the association mismatching is accompanied by two phenomenons, including a small similarity margin (similar appearance etc.) and low confidence (object oc-clusion etc.).
Inspired by these findings, an association-uncertainty metric is proposed to filter the uncertain candi-date set, which is further rectified using the tracklet appear-ance and motion clues. The proposed mechanism, termed
Uncertainty-aware Tracklet-Labeling (UTL), generates highly-accurate pseudo-tracklets to learn the embedding consistency. The proposed UTL has two features: (1) it can directly boost the tracking performance during inference as well. (2) it is complementary to existing methods and can be incorporated with consistent performance.
Second, uncertainty can guide the hard sample augmen-tation. The trustworthy pseudo-tracklets can be exploited to incorporate temporal information into sample augmen-tation, thereby overcoming the key limitation of current augmentation-based methods. To this end, we develop a
Tracklet-Guided Augmentation (TGA) strategy to sim-ulate the real motion of pseudo-tracklets. Specifically,
TGA generates augmentation samples aligned to the highly-uncertain objects in the pseudo-tracklet for hard example mining. Because a high association-uncertainty basically indicates the presence of challenging negative examples. To achieve this goal, a hierarchical uncertainty-based sampling mechanism is developed to ensure a trustworthy pseudo-tracklet and hard sample augmentation.
The ultimate unsupervised MOT framework, namely
U2MOT, is proved effective on several public bench-marks (i.e., MOT17 [31], MOT20 [7], and the challeng-ing VisDrone-MOT [57]). The experiments show that
U2MOT significantly outperforms previous unsupervised methods (e.g., 62.7% v.s. 58.6% of HOTA on MOT20), and achieves SOTA (e.g., 64.2% HOTA on MOT17) among ex-isting unsupervised and supervised trackers. Extensive ab-lation studies demonstrate the effectiveness of leveraging uncertainty in improving the consistency in turn.
Contributions of this paper are summarized as follows: 1) We are the first to leverage uncertainty in unsupervised multi-object tracking, where an association-level uncer-tain metric is introduced to verify the pseudo-tracklets, and a hierarchical uncertainty-based sampling mecha-nism is developed for hard sample generation. 2) We propose a novel unsupervised U2MOT framework, where UTL is developed to guarantee the intra-tracklet consistency and TGA is adopted to learn the consistent feature embedding. 3) We achieve a SOTA tracking performance among exist-ing methods, and demonstrate the generalized applica-tion prospects for the uncertainty metric. 2.