Abstract
Deep learning methods have shown remarkable per-formance in image denoising, particularly when trained on large-scale paired datasets. However, acquiring such paired datasets for real-world scenarios poses a significant challenge. Although unsupervised approaches based on generative adversarial networks (GANs) offer a promising solution for denoising without paired datasets, they are dif-ficult in surpassing the performance limitations of conven-tional GAN-based unsupervised frameworks without signif-icantly modifying existing structures or increasing the com-putational complexity of denoisers. To address this prob-lem, we propose a self-collaboration (SC) strategy for mul-tiple denoisers. This strategy can achieve significant perfor-mance improvement without increasing the inference com-plexity of the GAN-based denoising framework. Its basic idea is to iteratively replace the previous less powerful de-noiser in the filter-guided noise extraction module with the current powerful denoiser. This process generates better synthetic clean-noisy image pairs, leading to a more pow-erful denoiser for the next iteration. In addition, we pro-pose a baseline method that includes parallel generative adversarial branches with complementary “self-synthesis” and “unpaired-synthesis” constraints. This baseline en-sures the stability and effectiveness of the training net-work. The experimental results demonstrate the superiority of our method over state-of-the-art unsupervised methods. https://github.com/linxin0/SCPGabNet 1.

Introduction
Image denoising aims to recover noise-free images from noisy observations by reducing the potential noise. Al-*Corresponding Author
Figure 1. A real noisy image from the SSID Validation dataset.
Our SCPGabNet achieves better results compared to other denois-ing methods. though it is one of the oldest and most classical tasks in low-level computer vision, its fundamental nature continues drawing much interest. In general, existing image denoising algorithms can be divided into three groups: filtering-based
[11, 9, 5, 14, 35], model-based methods [16, 31, 7, 19, 48, 41] and learning-based [46, 28, 36, 30, 42, 44, 29, 8, 2, 20] methods.
The additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) assumption is widely used in image denoising. However, it is com-plex and challenging to adaptively achieve denoising based on filtering-based or model-based methods for high perfor-mance. In contrast, learning-based methods have demon-strated their superiority in image denoising. However, these methods [47, 36, 20, 39, 37, 45] are data-driven and typi-cally require pairs of clean-noisy datasets to train their mod-els. These noise samples are usually obtained through a predefined AWGN formulation that assumes the noise is
signal-independent.
On the contrary, the real-world noise is more com-plex and much different from the ideal AWGN assump-tion. Using the AWGN model directly for the real scenes leads to poor performance. Therefore, numerous methods
[4, 44, 2, 8, 38, 22, 37] have been proposed to capture paired clean-noisy image datasets from real scenes to promote the training of deep networks. However, these paired image-based methods focus on enhancing performance by improv-ing network structures, and acquiring well-aligned pairs of clean-noisy images is time-consuming and laborious.
To solve the aforementioned problems, unsupervised denoising-based methods [10, 21, 15, 43] have emerged.
The existing approaches are typically based on genera-tive adversarial network (GAN) frameworks, which mainly focus on generating higher quality pseudo-noisy images.
GAN2GAN [6] identified one of the key limitions of unsu-pervised denoising frameworks is the gap between the real and synthetic images, and proposed a novel approach using multiple generators and discriminators to generate images that closely conform to the real noise distribution. However, the performance of existing unsupervised denoising frame-works remains unsatisfactory due to the difficulty of adver-sarially training. Moreover, after training the model, the existing frameworks cannot further maximize the denoising potential without significantly changing its structure or in-creasing the inference complexity (e.g., using certain self-ensemble strategy) for denoisers. To address the previous limitations, we innovatively propose an unsupervised real-world denoising network called Self Collaboration Parallel
Generative Adversarial Branches (SCPGabNet). The self-collaboration (SC) strategy, which provides the framework a powerful self-boosting capability. This enables the de-noisers obtained from the conventional GAN framework to continuously evolve themselves and significantly improve their performance. The major contributions of our method are as follows:
• We design a novel filter-guided synthetic noisy image generator with the noise extraction (NE) module to synthesize high-quality clean-noisy image pairs, which serve as the foundation for implementing the SC strat-egy.
• We propose an effective parallel generative adversar-ial branches framework with complementary “self-synthesis” and “unpaired-synthesis” constraints as our powerful baseline.
• We are the first to propose the SC strategy, which sig-nificantly enhances the performance of the GAN-based denoising framework without increasing its inference complexity. Experimental results demonstrate the su-periority of our SCPGabNet over state-of-the-art unsu-pervised image denoising methods with large margins on the SIDD and DND benchmarking datasets. 2.