Abstract
Semi-supervised Learning (SSL) has received increasing attention in autonomous driving to reduce the enormous bur-den of 3D annotation. In this paper, we propose UpCycling, a novel SSL framework for 3D object detection with zero additional raw-level point cloud: learning from unlabeled de-identiﬁed intermediate features (i.e., “smashed” data) to preserve privacy. Since these intermediate features are naturally produced by the inference pipeline, no additional computation is required on autonomous vehicles. However, generating effective consistency loss for unlabeled feature-level scene turns out to be a critical challenge. The latest SSL frameworks for 3D object detection that enforce consistency regularization between different augmentations of an unla-beled raw-point scene become detrimental when applied to intermediate features. To solve the problem, we introduce a novel combination of hybrid pseudo labels and feature-level
Ground Truth sampling (F-GT), which safely augments unla-beled multi-type 3D scene features and provides high-quality supervision. We implement UpCycling on two representative 3D object detection models: SECOND-IoU and PV-RCNN.
Experiments on widely-used datasets (Waymo, KITTI, and
Lyft) verify that UpCycling outperforms other augmentation methods applied at the feature level. In addition, while pre-serving privacy, UpCycling performs better or comparably to the state-of-the-art methods that utilize raw-level unlabeled data in both domain adaptation and partial-label scenarios. 1.

Introduction
Although the concept of Autonomous Vehicles (AVs) has been around for years, ensuring the safety of users driving
AVs on real roads via 3D object detection models is still challenging. To this end, there have been continuous efforts to collect large datasets of 3D road scenes and annotate them carefully [11, 14, 38]. While rapid advances in sensor tech-nology facilitate the collection of 3D scenes at scale, the severe annotation burden remains as a main challenge. To (a) Raw-point data (b) Feature data produced from the 3D object detection network (c) Original point cloud scene (d) Restored point cloud scene using the inversion attack
Figure 1: Visualization of point cloud scenes. UpCycling improves level of privacy protection since an original point cloud scene cannot be restored from its intermediate feature. alleviate the problem, a couple of semi-supervised learning (SSL) methods for 3D object detection have been proposed recently, such as a combination of perturbation and con-sistency loss [51] and conﬁdence-based ﬁltering using IoU prediction results [45].
However, these methods learn from unlabeled raw 3D scenes. Collecting a vast amount of raw-level road scenes from AVs can potentially cause disclosure of sensitive pri-vate information on the roads [10, 25, 48]. Moreover, the demand for privacy-preserving domains is rapidly accelerat-ing. The EU’s General Data Protection Regulation requires
ﬁrms to implement data protection measures, safeguarding consumers’ privacy. This applies even to companies collect-ing autonomous driving data [27]. In addition, as 2D images can be restored from limited 3D data [28], it’s critical to fundamentally secure raw 3D point data.
Given that the problem of potential privacy leakage from
raw data collection exists in various applications, a number of studies have tried to not deal with raw data directly. Going beyond encrypting raw data [48], federated learning [12, 16] makes each edge node consume its data locally to train the model and share the model weights (or gradients) instead of raw data. Split learning [12, 36, 42] designs edge nodes to not share raw data but its intermediate feature (i.e., smashed data) that comes from passing through early-stage layers of the model. However, these approaches require local train-ing [32, 35], which makes resource-constrained AVs suffer more computation overhead. Given that AVs use signiﬁcant computing resources to process inference pipelines for 3D detection during driving, such additional computation hin-ders continuous model updates in natural driving conditions.
In this paper, we aim to address all the three issues: la-beling cost, privacy, and AV-side computation overhead. To ensure this end, we propose UpCycling, a novel SSL frame-work that does not utilize unlabeled raw 3D scenes (Fig-ure 1(a)) but de-identiﬁed, unlabeled intermediate features (Figure 1(b)) to advance 3D object detection models. Since an unlabeled intermediate feature is naturally produced dur-ing a regular detection pipeline with the 3D scene, UpCycling requires neither additional AV-side computation (e.g., local training) nor server-side annotation burden. Further, sharing features instead of raw 3D scenes improves the level of pri-vacy protection as the detection pipeline includes nonlinear layers and compression [5, 19, 33, 49, 53]. Because the pro-cess in the nonlinear layers [43] is irreversible, the original scene cannot be completely restored from its intermediate feature. As depicted in Figures 1(c) and (d), the inversion at-tack [8] attempted on the server side to restore the raw-point data does not result in a successful restoration.1
To realize the advantages, UpCycling should provide an effective feature-based SSL method for 3D object detection, which involves two challenges: (1) augmenting unlabeled intermediate features reliably to increase data diversity [15, 18] and (2) providing high-quality pseudo labels to supervise these augmented features. The state-of-the-art (SOTA) semi-supervised 3D object detection frameworks [45, 51] generate consistency loss between weak and strong augmentations of a 3D point scene. However, the augmentation methods targeting raw-level point clouds become detrimental when applied at a feature level. This is because an intermediate feature is a smashed form of its original 3D scene and has multiple types depending on the 3D object detection models, such as grid- and set-types. Therefore, na¨ıve application of the point augmentation methods at a feature level damages the important information in the 3D scene, which causes the pseudo labels to suffer from signiﬁcant noise.
To address the challenges, we propose high-quality hy-brid pseudo labels and feature-level ground-truth sampling (F-GT). Combining these methods not only achieves sig-niﬁcant data diversity but also improves quality of pseudo labels by adding zero-noise labels. We implement UpCycling on two representative 3D detection models, PV-RCNN [33] and SECOND-IoU [40],2 and perform various experiments on three major datasets for AV applications, KITTI [11],
Lyft [14], and Waymo [38]. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of UpCycling in both partial-label and domain adaptation scenarios.
The contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
• UpCycling is the ﬁrst framework that tackles labeling cost, privacy leakage, and AV-side computation cost altogether to train a 3D object detection model, which deeply investi-gates how to learn from unlabeled intermediate features.
• UpCycling provides a fresh eye on GT sampling in the context of SSL since it safely improves data diversity of unlabeled feature-level 3D scenes and signiﬁcantly im-proves pseudo-label quality by providing zero-noise labels.
• UpCycling not only protects privacy but also performs bet-ter or comparably to the SOTA methods in both domain adaptation and partial-label scenarios, on representative models and datasets for 3D object detection. 2.