Abstract
We present an advance in understanding the projective
Structure-from-Motion, focusing in particular on the view-ing graph: such a graph has cameras as nodes and funda-mental matrices as edges. We propose a practical method for testing finite solvability, i.e., whether a viewing graph in-duces a finite number of camera configurations. Our formu-lation uses a significantly smaller number of equations (up to 400ˆ) with respect to previous work. As a result, this is the only method in the literature that can be applied to large viewing graphs coming from real datasets, comprising up to 300K edges. In addition, we develop the first algorithm for identifying maximal finite-solvable components. 1.

Introduction
Structure-from-Motion [13] has been widely explored for its various applications in Computer Vision, with most research focusing on developing robust 3D scene recon-struction algorithms. In this respect, one compelling prob-lem is establishing if a set of fundamental matrices uniquely determines a configuration of cameras. Indeed, it is known that fundamental matrices can be uniquely computed from the camera matrices [7], but the converse may not be true when only a subset of all possible fundamental matrices is available (see Fig. 1). The viewing graph [10] can be an-alyzed to answer this question. Such a graph has vertices corresponding to cameras, and an edge is present if and only if the fundamental matrix between the two cameras exists.
A solvable graph uniquely identifies a configuration of cameras up to a single transformation (projective or Eu-clidean, depending on camera knowledge). Conversely, an unsolvable viewing graph is one for which multiple trans-formations exist that can be applied to the cameras without changing the fundamental matrices (or essential matrices in the calibrated case). The term “multiple” means any num-ber of solutions – finite or infinite – strictly greater than one.
An unsolvable graph is undesirable in practice as it repre-sents an inherently ill-posed problem, hence it is important to test solvability before running a structure-from-motion
Figure 1. While a set of cameras uniquely determines the funda-mental matrices, the opposite may not hold. Fundamental matrices can be conveniently represented as a viewing graph. The knowl-edge of the cameras is equivalent to a complete graph [10]. method [15, 8]. When a graph turns out to be non-solvable, the challenge is to identify its largest solvable component, but this is (at least) as difficult as testing.