Abstract
In stark contrast to the case of images, ﬁnding a con-cise, learnable discrete representation of 3D surfaces re-mains a challenge.
In particular, while polygon meshes are arguably the most common surface representation used in geometry processing, their irregular and combinatorial structure often make them unsuitable for learning-based applications. In this work, we present VoroMesh, a novel and differentiable Voronoi-based representation of water-tight 3D shape surfaces. From a set of 3D points (called generators) and their associated occupancy, we deﬁne our boundary representation through the Voronoi diagram of the generators as the subset of Voronoi faces whose two associated (equidistant) generators are of opposite occu-pancy: the resulting polygon mesh forms a watertight ap-proximation of the target shape’s boundary. To learn the position of the generators, we propose a novel loss func-tion, dubbed VoroLoss, that minimizes the distance from ground truth surface samples to the closest faces of the
Voronoi diagram which does not require an explicit con-struction of the entire Voronoi diagram. A direct optimiza-tion of the Voroloss to obtain generators on the Thingi32 dataset demonstrates the geometric efﬁciency of our repre-sentation compared to axiomatic meshing algorithms and recent learning-based mesh representations. We further use
VoroMesh in a learning-based mesh prediction task from input SDF grids on the ABC dataset, and show comparable performance to state-of-the-art methods while guaranteeing closed output surfaces free of self-intersections. 1.

Introduction
Geometry processing of three-dimensional shapes typi-cally relies on a discrete representation of its surface bound-ary. Among various boundary representations, point sets and surface polygon meshes are popular because they are simple to generate, edit, or render. While most tasks can be (c) VoroMesh (a) Target surface (b) Optimization
Figure 1: VoroMesh at a glance: To ﬁt our representation to (a) a target shape (top: curve; bottom: surface), (b) the positions of generators around the shape boundary are op-timized based on our VoroLoss, before a binary occupancy is assigned to each generator; (c) the VoroMesh is then ex-tracted as a subset of the Voronoi diagram of the generators containing only the Voronoi faces between pairs of genera-tors of opposite occupancy. efﬁciently performed with non-learning tools from the stan-dard geometry processing toolbox, some of them (e.g., ill-posed problems such as reconstruction from sparse data, or data-driven tasks) require learning tools. Using neural net-works with a differentiable (explicit or implicit) boundary representation can be a powerful way to tackle these prob-lems. Yet, discrete representations such as surface poly-gon meshes rely on two parts: vertex locations, and vertex connectivity deﬁning the polygonal facets. The ﬁrst part, continuous in nature, is easy to learn, but the second part, now combinatorial, is substantially more difﬁcult, which has hampered mesh-based learning methods in the past. In-deed, besides the complexity issues arising from modeling vertex connectivity, the discrete nature of topological con-ﬁgurations in meshes poses two accompanying differentia-bility issues that are particularly relevant in learning appli-cations. First, the way connectivity is induced from corre-sponding discrete variables generally is not differentiable; even if probabilistic modeling can offer differentiable sam-pling from discrete variables [17], the combinatorial nature of connectivity forces faces and edges to be considered in-dependently, which often produce polygon soup predictions instead of watertight meshes. Second, vertex position op-timization can also be hindered since non-stable mesh pre-diction during training results in discontinuity in most of the commonly-used loss functions based on sampling from pre-dicted mesh surfaces, such as chamfer distance and point-to-surface distance: any change of topology in the predic-tion over the course of training can result in discontinuous changes in the coordinates of on-surface samples.
State-of-the-art data-driven methods for mesh predic-tion can be roughly categorized into two groups: meth-ods producing shapes with neural implicit representations and meshing their zero-level sets [16, 31, 33, 38], and ap-proaches predicting explicit meshes as sets of vertices and faces [6, 9, 13, 32, 40, 47]. While proven to be powerful at capturing surfaces, implicit representations have their draw-backs, such as the need for additional test-time surface dis-cretization to produce meshes (which can be costly for high resolutions), and limited control over the geometry of the produced meshes due to the inability to explicitly deﬁne optimization objectives on the output surfaces. While re-cent works in the second category show promising results in explicit mesh prediction, most of them rely on the use of regular discretization grids, which limit their expressivity and do not guarantee watertightness of the output meshes.
In order to circumvent the issues mentioned thus far, we propose to use a differentiable surface representation based on the 3D Voronoi diagram [4] of an input point set of generators which canonically derives its combinato-rial information from their location. The continuous place-ment of generators results in an adaptive discretization of 3D surfaces which substantially improves the expressivity of our representation compared to methods relying on reg-ular grids. We leverage the geometric properties of the
Voronoi diagram (speciﬁcally, the fact that Voronoi cells are deﬁned as intersections of halfspaces) to formulate a novel loss based only on bisectors between generators rather than the full Voronoi diagram: this allows for a differen-tiable optimization of the 3D Voronoi generators. Since our loss function only requires the position of generators for faithful surface approximation, our Voronoi representation successfully mitigates the differentiability issues associated with explicit connectivity modeling. Compared to previ-ous Voronoi-based representations [48], we do not focus on volume decomposition but on surface approximation, so our loss does not need to be regularized via the addition of the centroidal Voronoi tessellation energy to favor the spreading of generators.
In summary, the main contributions of this work are:
• We establish a novel loss function, the VoroLoss, which directly optimizes 3D Voronoi generators to ﬁt an input target shape (provided as a surface triangle mesh) without requiring an explicit computation of the Voronoi diagram;
• We show that the representation power of our VoroMesh outperforms Marching Cubes, Dual Contouring, and two recent learning approaches in terms of geometric ﬁdelity; the proposed VoroMesh and
VoroLoss can be integrated into a learning pipeline to pre-dict 3D Voronoi generators, along with their occupancy, to reconstruct closed and non-self-intersecting meshes from input regular grids of SDF values.
• We demonstrate that 2.