Abstract
Human pose transfer aims to synthesis a new image of the source person in a target pose. Among the various ex-isting methods, attention and flow have emerged as two of the most popular and effective approaches. Attention ex-cels at preserving the semantic structure of the source im-age, which is more reflected in the low-frequency domain.
Contrastively, flow is better at retaining fine-grained tex-ture details in the high-frequency domain. To leverage the advantages of both attention and flow simultaneously, this paper proposes Wavelet-aware Image-based Pose Transfer (WaveIPT) as a novel approach to fuse the attention and flow in the wavelet domain. To improve the fusion effect and avoid interference from irrelevant information across dif-ferent frequencies, WaveIPT first applies Intra-scale Local
Correlation (ILC) to adaptively fuse attention and flow in the same scale according to their strengths in low and high-frequency domains. Subsequently, WaveIPT employs Inter-scale Feature Interaction (IFI) to explore inter-scale fre-quency features, facilitating effective information transfer across different scales. Furthermore, we introduce Progres-sive Flow Regularization (PFR), an effective method that al-leviates the challenges of flow estimation under large pose differences. The experiments on the DeepFashion dataset demonstrate that WaveIPT achieves a new state-of-the-art in terms of both FID and LPIPS, with improvements of 4.97% and 3.89%, respectively. 1.

Introduction
Human pose transfer refers to the task of transforming a given person into the target pose, which has extensive ap-plications in movie editing, online shopping, virtual reality, etc. However, achieving both texture-preserving and real-istic huaman pose transfer remains a challenge, especially
*Equal Contribution. † Corresponding author. This work was done when Liyuan Ma was an intern at Alibaba Group.
Figure 1.
Illustrative comparison of (a) attention alignment-based [27, 43], (b) flow alignment-based [29, 13], and the pro-posed (c) wavelet-aware fusion method. The lower part shows the different frequency distributions of the source texture aligned by attention and flow. The low frequency (LF) semantic structure (the leg part) can be better recovered by attention, whereas the high fre-quency (HF) component from flow alignment is closer to the real target (the cloth detail). when there is a significant pose difference or the person im-age contains complex texture.
Previous research has employed various methods to in-teract with the source texture and target pose, including style modulation [24, 42], deformable convolution [37], affine transformation [47], flow [29, 17, 13, 4, 49, 34, 48, 22], attention [43, 27, 33, 12, 14, 50, 44], etc. Among these methods, flow and attention have proven to be the most ef-fective for texture alignment at the pixel or feature level.
Flow-based methods [48, 17, 34, 22] utilize appearance flows to deform and allocate the local texture information to the target positions based on the target pose. This ap-proach is conducive to retaining high-frequency details, as
it gathers local texture information to calculate the output of target positions. However, due to the instability and dif-ficulty of flow estimation under large pose differences, the reliability of image semantics cannot be guaranteed, espe-cially when dealing with large pose differences, and thus leads to a deterioration in visual quality. Attention-based methods [43, 27, 14, 50] utilize various variants of cross-attention to aggregate source texture information through weighted summation. The global receptive field of the attention mechanism enables it to capture reasonable hu-man semantic and low-frequency structure. However, it is observed that the aggregating process disrupts the rel-ative spatial relationship, leading to a deficiency in local details in the generated images. Most prevailing meth-ods [48, 34, 22, 43, 27, 14] solely rely on either flow or attention mechanisms for texture alignment without fully exploiting their complementary advantages. Ren et al. [28] propose a mask-based method to integrate flow and atten-tion in the spatial domain. In their approach, the differences that exist in frequency domain are not taken into considera-tion, leading to a compromised fusion effect. Ma et al. [21] attempt to fuse flow and attention in the frequency domain.
However, their method applies an implicitly fusion strategy, thereby failing to effectively exploit the complementarity in the frequency domain.
Our analysis, as depicted in Figure 1, highlights the dif-ferences in frequency distribution between attention and flow alignment, with flow being capable of retaining high-frequency details while attention better preserves low-frequency structures [1, 25, 32]. This observation has mo-tivated us to propose WaveIPT to incorporate frequency information from both attention and flow adaptively.
In contrast to previous wavelet-based approaches that primar-ily focus on improving feature representation by enhancing convolution or modified up-/down-sampling operations,our method is specially designed to address the feature fusion problem under uneven frequency distribution for human pose transfer. WaveIPT aligns the features using atten-tion and flow mechanisms, followed by transforming the features into the wavelet domain using Discrete Wavelet
Transform (DWT). The aligned features are then fused us-ing Intra-scale Local Correlation (ILC) and Inter-scale Fea-ILC supplements differ-ture Interaction (IFI) modules. ent frequency bands within specific scale by leveraging the advantages of flow and attention in preserving high- and low-frequency information. Additionally, the IFI mecha-nism is devised to promote efficient transmission between scales by adaptively updating the current-scale features onto the previous-scale features. Furthermore, convolutions with larger dilated rates are utilized to process sparse low-frequency features, leading to a more comprehensive and contextually rich feature representation.
We introduce Progressive Flow Regularization (PFR), which leverages an intermediate pose to narrow the gap be-tween source and target poses during flow estimation train-ing. By approximating the flow from the source to the tar-get through the source-to-intermediate and intermediate-to-target flows, we are able to effectively reduce the pose dif-ference and enhance the performance of flow estimation.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• This paper proposes WaveIPT, a novel method that combines attention and flow with dedicated designed
ILC and IFI. This approach is capable of effectively aligning the source texture in the wavelet domain and enables realistic pose transfer results.
• This work introduces PFR as an effective approach to address the challenge of flow estimation under large pose variation.
• The proposed WaveIPT achieves state-of-the-art re-sults on the DeepFashion dataset, demonstrating the effectiveness of our method. 2.