RGB Image to Thermal Image TranslationMulti-level RGB featuresSemantic segmentation models gain robustness against poor lighting conditions by virtue of complementary infor-mation from visible (RGB) and thermal images. Despite its importance, most existing RGB-T semantic segmentation models perform primitive fusion strategies, such as con-catenation, element-wise summation and weighted summa-tion, to fuse features from different modalities. These strate-gies, unfortunately, overlook the modality differences due to different imaging mechanisms, so that they suffer from the reduced discriminability of the fused features. To address such an issue, we propose, for the ﬁrst time, the strategy of bridging-then-fusing, where the innovation lies in a novelAdaptive-weighted Bi-directional Modality Difference Re-duction Network (ABMDRNet). Concretely, a Modality Dif-ference Reduction and Fusion (MDRF) subnetwork is de-signed, which ﬁrst employs a bi-directional image-to-image translation based method to reduce the modality differ-ences between RGB features and thermal features, and then adaptively selects those discriminative multi-modality fea-tures for RGB-T semantic segmentation in a channel-wise weighted fusion way. Furthermore, considering the impor-tance of contextual information in semantic segmentation, a Multi-Scale Spatial Context (MSC) module and a Multi-Scale Channel Context (MCC) module are proposed to ex-ploit the interactions among multi-scale contextual infor-mation of cross-modality features together with their long-range dependencies along spatial and channel dimensions, respectively. Comprehensive experiments on MFNet dataset demonstrate that our method achieves new state-of-the-art results.*Equally corresponding authors.Translation networkSupervisionSupervisionTranslation networkMulti-level thermal featuresThermal Image to RGB Image Translation (a)RGBThermal (b) (e) (c) (f) (d) (g)Figure 1. Illustration of modality difference reduction. (a) Bi-directional modality difference reduction. (b)-(d) Original RGB features, thermal features and their fused features, respectively. (e)-(g) RGB features, thermal features and their fused features af-ter reducing modality differences, respectively. 