Due to the intensive cost of labor and expertise in anno-tating 3D medical images at a voxel level, most benchmark datasets are equipped with the annotations of only one type of organs and/or tumors, resulting in the so-called partially labeling issue. To address this issue, we propose a dynamic on-demand network (DoDNet) that learns to segment multi-ple organs and tumors on partially labeled datasets. DoD-Net consists of a shared encoder-decoder architecture, a task encoding module, a controller for dynamic ﬁlter gen-eration, and a single but dynamic segmentation head. The information of current segmentation task is encoded as a task-aware prior to tell the model what the task is expected to achieve. Different from existing approaches which ﬁx ker-nels after training, the kernels in dynamic head are gener-ated adaptively by the controller, conditioned on both in-put image and assigned task. Thus, DoDNet is able to segment multiple organs and tumors, as done by multiple networks or a multi-head network, in a much efﬁcient andﬂexible manner. We created a large-scale partially labeled dataset called MOTS and demonstrated the superior per-formance of our DoDNet over other competitors on seven organ and tumor segmentation tasks. We also transferred the weights pre-trained on MOTS to a downstream multi-organ segmentation task and achieved state-of-the-art per-formance. This study provides a general 3D medical im-age segmentation model that has been pre-trained on a large-scale partially labeled dataset and can be extended (after ﬁne-tuning) to downstream volumetric medical data segmentation tasks. Code and models are available at: https://git.io/DoDNet∗J. Zhang and Y. Xie contributed equally. Corresponding author: Y.Xia and C. Shen. Work was done when J. Zhang and Y. Xie were visitingThe University of Adelaide.Hepatic Vessel & TumorKidney & TumorPancreas & TumorLiver & TumorLung TumorColon TumorSpleenFigure 1 – Illustration of partially labeled multi-organ and tu-mor segmentation. This task aims to segment multiple organs and tumors using a network trained on several partially labeled datasets, each of which is originally specialized for the segmen-tation of a particular abdominal organ and/or related tumors.For instance, the ﬁrst dataset only has annotations of the liver and liver tumors, and the second dataset only provides annota-tions of kidneys and kidney tumors. Here each color represents a partially labeled dataset. 