The rapid progress of photorealistic synthesis tech-niques have reached at a critical point where the bound-ary between real and manipulated images starts to blur.Thus, benchmarking and advancing digital forgery analy-sis have become a pressing issue. However, existing face forgery datasets either have limited diversity or only sup-port coarse-grained analysis.To counter this emerging threat, we construct theForgeryNet dataset, an extremely large face forgery dataset*Equal contribution.†Work done during an internship at SenseTime Research.‡Corresponding author.§https://yinanhe.github.io/projects/forgerynet. html 0 ight):fake,fake,fake,fake,fake,fake,fake,real,fake,real,fake,realThelabelofimagesinFig.1(a)(fromlefttor-with uniﬁed annotations in image- and video-level data across four tasks: 1) Image Forgery Classiﬁcation, in-cluding two-way (real / fake), three-way (real / fake with identity-replaced forgery approaches / fake with identity-remained forgery approaches), and n-way (real and 15 2) Spa-respective forgery approaches) classiﬁcation. tial Forgery Localization, which segments the manipu-lated area of fake images compared to their correspond-ing real images. 3) Video Forgery Classiﬁcation, which re-deﬁnes the video-level forgery classiﬁcation with manip-ulated frames in random positions. This task is impor-tant because attackers in real world are free to manipu-late any target frame. and 4) Temporal Forgery Localiza-tion, to localize the temporal segments which are manipu-lated. ForgeryNet is by far the largest publicly available deep face forgery dataset in terms of data-scale (2.9 million 4360images, 221,247 videos), manipulations (7 image-level ap-proaches, 8 video-level approaches), perturbations (36 in-dependent and more mixed perturbations) and annotations (6.3 million classiﬁcation labels, 2.9 million manipulated area annotations and 221,247 temporal forgery segment la-bels). We perform extensive benchmarking and studies of existing face forensics methods and obtain several valuable observations. We hope that the scale, quality, and variety of our ForgeryNet dataset will foster further research and innovation in the area of face forgery classiﬁcation, as well as spatial and temporal forgery localization etc. 