Global Context RecognitionHidden features in neural network usually fail to learn informative representation for 3D segmentation as supervi-sions are only given on output prediction, while this can be solved by omni-scale supervision on intermediate layers. In this paper, we bring the ﬁrst omni-scale supervision method to point cloud segmentation via the proposed gradual Re-ceptive Field Component Reasoning (RFCR), where targetReceptive Field Component Codes (RFCCs) are designed to record categories within receptive ﬁelds for hidden units in the encoder. Then, target RFCCs will supervise the de-coder to gradually infer the RFCCs in a coarse-to-ﬁne cat-egories reasoning manner, and ﬁnally obtain the semantic labels. Because many hidden features are inactive with tiny magnitude and make minor contributions to RFCC predic-tion, we propose a Feature Densiﬁcation with a centrifu-gal potential to obtain more unambiguous features, and it is in effect equivalent to entropy regularization over features.More active features can further unleash the potential of our omni-supervision method. We embed our method into four prevailing backbones and test on three challenging bench-marks. Our method can signiﬁcantly improve the backbones in all three datasets. Speciﬁcally, our method brings new state-of-the-art performances for S3DIS as well as Seman-tic3D and ranks the 1st in the ScanNet benchmark among all the point-based methods. Code is publicly available at https://github.com/azuki-miho/RFCR. iR e c e p t i v eF e dC o m p o n e n t lRFCC.  .  .R e a s o n n g i.  .  ..  .  . c.  .  ..  .  . floor chair table wall bookshelf unlabeledFigure 1: Illustration of Receptive Field Component Rea-soning for a point cloud in ScanNet v2 from top to bottom.The Receptive Field Component Code (RFCC) indicates the category components in the receptive ﬁeld. In the decod-ing stage, the segmentation problem is decomposed into a much easier global context recognition problem (predict-ing the global RFCCs, see the top of ﬁgure) and a series of receptive ﬁeld component reasoning problems. During rea-soning, the target RFCCs generated in the encoder are used as the groundtruth in the decoder to guide the network to gradually reason the RFCCs in a coarse-to-ﬁne manner, andﬁnally obtain the semantic labels. 