To generate “accurate” scene graphs, almost all exist-ing methods predict pairwise relationships in a determin-istic manner. However, we argue that visual relationships are often semantically ambiguous. Speciﬁcally, inspired by linguistic knowledge, we classify the ambiguity into three types: Synonymy Ambiguity, Hyponymy Ambiguity, andMulti-view Ambiguity. The ambiguity naturally leads to the issue of implicit multi-label, motivating the need for diverseIn this work, we propose a novel plug-and-predictions. play Probabilistic Uncertainty Modeling (PUM) module. It models each union region as a Gaussian distribution, whose variance measures the uncertainty of the corresponding vi-sual content. Compared to the conventional determinis-tic methods, such uncertainty modeling brings stochasticity of feature representation, which naturally enables diverse predictions. As a byproduct, PUM also manages to cover more ﬁne-grained relationships and thus alleviates the is-sue of bias towards frequent relationships. Extensive exper-iments on the large-scale Visual Genome benchmark show that combining PUM with newly proposed ResCAGCN can achieve state-of-the-art performances, especially under the mean recall metric. Furthermore, we show the universal ef-fectiveness of PUM by plugging it into some existing models and provide insightful analysis of its ability to generate di-verse yet plausible visual relationships.Figure 1. Examples of semantic ambiguity in Visual Genome dataset. The ﬁrst two columns show the comparisons between two plausible predicates for similar visual scenes and the right-most column illustrates the corresponding phenomenons in seman-tic space. (a) carrying and holding share overlapping deﬁni-tions and are interchangeable to describe the relationship between a man and an umbrella. (b) Both on and laying on are reason-able to describe the scene where a cat is on top o a bench, despite their semantic speciﬁcity difference. (c) Different human annota-tors focus on different points of view, i.e. using (actional) vs. in front of (spatial), to describe a working man and a laptop. 