The ability to segment teeth precisely from digitized 3D dental models is an essential task in computer-aided or-thodontic surgical planning. To date, deep learning based methods have been popularly used to handle this task.State-of-the-art methods directly concatenate the raw at-tributes of 3D inputs, namely coordinates and normal vec-tors of mesh cells, to train a single-stream network for fully-automated tooth segmentation. This, however, has the drawback of ignoring the different geometric meanings pro-vided by those raw attributes. This issue might possibly confuse the network in learning discriminative geometric features and result in many isolated false predictions on the dental model. Against this issue, we propose a two-stream graph convolutional network (TSGCNet) to learn multi-view geometric information from different geometric at-tributes. Our TSGCNet adopts two graph-learning streams, designed in an input-aware fashion, to extract more dis-criminative high-level geometric representations from coor-dinates and normal vectors, respectively. These feature rep-resentations learned from the designed two different streams are further fused to integrate the multi-view complemen-tary information for the cell-wise dense prediction task. We evaluate our proposed TSGCNet on a real-patient dataset of dental models acquired by 3D intraoral scanners, and experimental results demonstrate that our method signiﬁ-cantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods for 3D shape segmentation.∗Equal contribution.†Corresponding author.Figure 1. An illustration of 3D dental model. In the local space indicated by the blue box, cell A and cell B are spatially close but with much different normal vectors (indicated by the black arrowsIn contrast, cell A and cell C have simi-in the zoomed view). lar normal vectors but are far from each other.It suggests that coordinates and normal vectors provide completely different geo-metric information. Hence, simply concatenating them as a single feature vector (commonly used in the conventional single-stream networks) cannot properly integrate such complementary informa-tion to learn more discriminative geometric representations for cell classiﬁcation, which will result in many isolated false predictions on dental model (as indicated by one of red dotted circle). 