Abstract
Cooperative communication plays a central role in theories of human cognition, language, development, culture, and human-robot interaction. Prior models of cooperative communication are algorithmic in nature and do not shed light on why cooperation may yield effective belief transmission and what limitations may arise due to differences between beliefs of agents. Through a connection to the theory of optimal transport, we establishing a mathematical framework for cooperative communication. We derive prior models as special cases, statistical interpretations of belief transfer plans, and proofs of robustness and instability. Computational simulations support and elaborate our theoretical results, and demonstrate ﬁt to human behavior. The results show that cooperative communication provably enables effective, robust belief transmission which is required to explain feats of human learning and improve human-machine interaction. 1

Introduction
Cooperative communication is invoked across language, cognitive development, cultural anthropology, and robotics to explain people’s ability to effectively transmit information and accumulate knowledge.
Theories claim that people have evolved a specialized ecological niche [Tomasello, 1999, Boyd et al., 2011] and learning mechanisms [Csibra and Gergely, 2009, Grice, 1975, Sperber and Wilson, 1986], which explain our abilities to learn and accumulate knowledge; however, we lack mathematical theories that would allow us analyze basic properties of cooperative communication between agents.
Models of belief updating [Chater et al., 2008, Tenenbaum et al., 2011, Ghahramani, 2015] and action selection [Luce, 2012, Sutton et al., 1998] have recently been combined into models of cooperative communication in cognitive science [Shafto and Goodman, 2008a, Shafto et al., 2014], cognitive development [Eaves Jr et al., 2016, Bonawitz et al., 2011, Bridgers et al., 2019], linguistic pragmatics
[Goodman and Stuhlmüller, 2013], and robotics [Ho et al., 2016, Hadﬁeld-Menell et al., 2016, Fisac et al., 2017, Milli and Dragan, 2019]. These models are algorithms for computing cooperative communication plans using Theory of Mind reasoning. However, these models do not formalize the problem mathematically and therefore do not support general conclusions about the nature or limitations of cooperative communication.
Build upon mathematical and computational analysis, we provide answers to fundamental questions of cooperative communication. Our contributions are as follows. In Section 2, we interpret cooperative communication as a problem of optimal transport [Monge, 1781, Villani, 2008, Peyré and Cuturi, 2019], derive prior models of cooperative communication as special cases, and derive relationships to rate distortion theory. In particular, we theoretically guarantee the existence of optimal communication plan and algorithmically ensure the achievablility of such plans. In Section 3, we mathematically 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
analyze properties of cooperative communication including statistical interpretations, robustness to violations of common ground, and instability under greedy data selection. In Section 4, we computationally analyze robustness to common ground violations, sensitivity to greedy selection of data, approximate methods of correcting common ground, and demonstrate ﬁt to human data. 2 Cooperative communication as a problem of optimal transport
Communication is a pair of processes considered between two agents, that we will refer to as a teacher and a learner, wherein the teacher selects data and the learner draws inferences based on those data. Optimal transport provides a mathematical framework for formalizing movement of one distribution to another, and therefore a framework for modeling communication. By recasting communication as belief transport we will gain access to mathematical and computational techniques for understanding and analyzing the problem of cooperative communication. 2.1