Abstract
In an increasing number of AI scenarios, collaborations among different orga-nizations or agents (e.g., human and robots, mobile units) are often essential to accomplish an organization-speciﬁc mission. However, to avoid leaking useful and possibly proprietary information, organizations typically enforce stringent security constraints on sharing modeling algorithms and data, which signiﬁcantly limits collaborations. In this work, we introduce the Assisted Learning framework for organizations to assist each other in supervised learning tasks without revealing any organization’s algorithm, data, or even task. An organization seeks assistance by broadcasting task-speciﬁc but nonsensitive statistics and incorporating others’ feedback in one or more iterations to eventually improve its predictive performance.
Theoretical and experimental studies, including real-world medical benchmarks, show that Assisted Learning can often achieve near-oracle learning performance as if data and training processes were centralized. 1

Introduction
One of the signiﬁcant characteristics of big data is variety, featuring in a large number of statistical learners, each with personalized data and domain-speciﬁc learning tasks. While building an entire database by integrating all the accessible data sources could provide an ideal dataset for learning, sharing heterogeneous data among multiple organizations typically leads to tradeoffs between learning efﬁciency and data privacy. As the awareness of privacy arises with a decentralized set of organizations (learners), a realistic challenge is to protect learners’ privacy concerning sophisticated modeling algorithms and data.
There exists a large market of collaborative learning in, e.g., the internet-of-things [1], autonomous mobility [2], industrial control [3], unmanned aerial vehicles [4], and biological monitoring [5]. We will take the medical industry as an example to illustrate such learning scenarios and their pros and cons. It is common for medical organizations to acquire others’ assistance in order to improve clinical care [6], reduce capital costs [7], and accelerate scientiﬁc progress [8]. Consider two organizations
Alice (a hospital) and Bob (a related clinical laboratory), who collect various features from the same group of people. Now Alice wants to predict Length of Stay (LOS), which is one of the most important driving forces of hospital costs [9].
The corresponding website of this project: http://www.assisted-learning.org. 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
Table 1: Examples of Bob assisting Alice (none of whom will transmit personalized models or data).
Alice
Bob
Collating Index
Hospital
Mobile device
Clinical Lab Cloud service
User ID/email
Patient ID
Investor
Financial trader Eye-movement
Timestamp
Subject ID
EEG
Scenario 1: If the organization is not capable of modeling or computing, it has to sacriﬁce data privacy for the assistance of learning. In our example, if Alice does not have much knowledge of machine learning or enough computational resources, she may prefer to be assisted by Bob via
Machine-Learning-as-a-Service (MLaaS) [10, 11]. In MLaaS, a service provider, Bob receives predictor-label pairs (x, y) from Alice and then learns a private supervised model. Bob provides prediction services upon Alice’s future data after the learning stage by applying the learned model. In this learning scenario, Alice gains information from Bob’s modeling, but at the cost of exposing her private data.
Scenario 2: If Alice has the capability of modeling and computing, how can she beneﬁt from Bob’s relevant but private medical data and model? One way is to privatize Alice’s or Bob’s raw data by adding noises and transmit them to the other organization. Though this strategy can have privacy guarantees (e.g., those evaluated under the differential privacy framework [12–14]), it often leads to information loss and degraded learning performance. Another solution for Alice is to send data with homomorphic encryption [15]. While it is information lossless, it may suffer from intractable communication and computation costs.
Privacy-sensitive organizations from various industries will not or cannot transmit their personalized models or data. Some common examples are listed in Table 1. Under this limitation, is it possible for
Bob to assist Alice in the above two scenarios?
For Scenario 1, Bob could choose to simply receive Alice’s ID-label pairs, collate them with his own private data, and learn a supervised model privately. Bob then provides prediction services for
Alice, who inquires with future data in the form of an application programming interface (API). For
Scenario 2, suppose that Alice also has a private learning model and private data features that can be (partially) collated to Bob’s. Is it possible to still leverage the model as well as data held by Bob? A classical approach for Alice is to perform model selection from her own model and Bob’s private model (through Bob’s API), and then decide whether to use Bob’s service in the future. A related approach is to perform statistical model averaging over the two learners. However, neither approach will signiﬁcantly outperform the better one of Alice’s and Bob’s [16, 17]. This is mainly because that model selection or averaging in the above scenario fails to fully utilize all the available data, which is a union of Alice’s and Bob’s.
Is it possible for Alice to achieve the performance as if all Alice and Bob’s private information were centralized (so that the ‘oracle performance’ can be obtained)? This motivates us to propose the framework of Assisted Learning, where the main idea is to treat the predictor x as private and use a suitable choice of ‘y’ at each round of assistance so that Alice may beneﬁt from Bob as if she had
Bob’s data.
The main contributions of this work are threefold. First, we introduce the notion of Assisted Learning, which is naturally suitable for contemporary machine learning markets. Second, in the context of
Assisted Learning, we develop two speciﬁc protocols so that a service provider can assist others by improving their predictive performance without the need for central coordination. Third, we show that the proposed learning protocol can be applied to a wide range of nonlinear and nonparametric learning tasks, where near-oracle performance can be achieved.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. First, we brieﬂy discuss the recent development of some related areas in Section 2. Then, a real-world application is presented to demonstrate Assisted
Learning’s suitability and necessity in Section 3. In Section 4, we formally introduce Assisted
Learning and give theoretical analysis. In Section 5, we provide experimental studies on both real and synthetic datasets. We conclude in Section 6. 2