Abstract
Panoptic segmentation is posed as a new popular test-bed for the state-of-the-art holistic scene understanding methods with the requirement of simultaneously seg-menting both foreground things and background stuff. The state-of-the-art panoptic segmentation network exhibits high structural complexity in different network com-ponents, i.e. backbone, proposal-based foreground branch, segmentation-based background branch, and feature fusion module across branches, which heavily relies on expert knowledge and tedious trials. In this work, we propose an efﬁcient, coop-erative and highly automated framework to simultaneously search for all main com-ponents including backbone, segmentation branches, and feature fusion module in a uniﬁed panoptic segmentation pipeline based on the prevailing one-shot Network
Architecture Search (NAS) paradigm. Notably, we extend the common single-task
NAS into the multi-component scenario by taking the advantage of the newly pro-posed intra-modular search space and problem-oriented inter-modular search space, which helps us to obtain an optimal network architecture that not only performs well in both instance segmentation and semantic segmentation tasks but also be aware of the reciprocal relations between foreground things and background stuff classes.
To relieve the vast computation burden incurred by applying NAS to complicated network architectures, we present a novel path-priority greedy search policy to ﬁnd a robust, transferrable architecture with signiﬁcantly reduced searching overhead.
Our searched architecture, namely Auto-Panoptic, achieves the new state-of-the-art on the challenging COCO and ADE20K benchmarks. Moreover, extensive experi-ments are conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of path-priority policy and transferability of Auto-Panoptic across different datasets. Codes and models are available at: https://github.com/Jacobew/AutoPanoptic. 1

Introduction
Recently the community has witnessed great progress in semantic segmentation and instance segmen-tation. However, a more desirable system is expected to directly perform image holistic understanding about all instances and background segments in one feedforward step. To bridge the chasm between the understanding of foreground things and background stuff, panoptic segmentation [21] becomes a new test-bed on which the state-of-the-art methods can validate their capability in simultaneously parsing the foreground objects at the instance level and the background contents at the semantic level.
Some attempts [20, 22] try to tackle two tasks via stitching the proposal-based foreground branch and segmentation-based background branch without compromising the accuracy of instance and semantic (cid:63) Corresponding Author. 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
segmentation. While conceptually straightforward, they overlook the underlying relations between foreground and background, and is thus subject to limited performance gain. Some later approaches
[40, 28, 23, 22, 38, 43] try to explicitly model this relationship in a learnable fashion. UPSNet
[40] utilizes a panoptic head to jointly optimize the outputs of instance and semantic segmentation.
BGRNet [38] proposes bidirectional feature fusion at the proposal and class level based on a graph neural network. However, these approaches heavily rely on carefully hand-tuned architectures and require complicated processes such as RoI-Flatten [22], RoI-Upsample [23], mask pruning process
[40], and so on. Moreover, the designs of key components, e.g., backbone and heads, and different combinations of them can have a signiﬁcant impact on the performance of a panoptic segmentation model, which is also observed in other ﬁne-grained vision tasks like object detection [44, 14, 35].
This manifests the necessity of developing a well-designed architecture for panoptic segmentation that has optimal combinations of different components with minimal human efforts.
In this paper, inspired by the advances achieved by Network Architecture Search (NAS) on funda-mental vision tasks [27, 2, 36, 41], we aim to explore an efﬁcient foreground-background cooperative architecture automatically tailored for panoptic segmentation, namely Auto-Panoptic. Unlike previous work that only exploits a speciﬁc part of the network, our Auto-Panoptic extends the common NAS paradigm into the multi-component scenario and manages to search for all key components including backbone, segmentation branches and feature fusion module in a uniﬁed pipeline.
First, to get an optimal combination of different key components in the panoptic segmentation pipeline,
Auto-Panoptic learns customized intra-modular structures of the backbone, instance segmentation branch and semantic segmentation branch in an end-to-end fashion. Second, to fully utilize the complementary information provided by foreground objects and background stuff, the inter-modular search space is proposed to establish the correlations between two separate branches. Finally, regarding the severe convergence inefﬁciency in the architecture search phase, we disentangle different choice paths in supernet and propose a novel path-priority search policy to perform path-level evaluation, which signiﬁcantly reduces searching overhead without compromising the accuracy.
In summary, our contributions are summarized as follows:
• To the best of our knowledge, we make the ﬁrst effort to search for the whole structure for panoptic segmentation, which helps us to derive a robust, transferable, high performing network architecture with minimal human efforts.
• We reformulate the search space of panoptic segmentation networks as a combination of an efﬁcient intra-modular search space and a problem-oriented inter-modular search space, which helps Auto-Panoptic not only perform well in two separate tasks but also be aware of the reciprocal relations between foreground things and background stuff.
• Being confronted with the vast search space in the architecture search phase, we propose a novel greedy approach, named the Path-Priority Search Policy, that can signiﬁcantly reduce searching overhead in searching for a high performing architecture.
• Our Auto-Panoptic achieves new state-of-the-art results on two challenging benchmarks, i.e.,
COCO and ADE20K and we conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate the robustness of the searched architecture and the effectiveness of our framework. 2