Abstract
Optimal auctions maximize a seller’s expected revenue subject to individual ra-tionality and strategyproofness for the buyers. Myerson’s seminal work in 1981 settled the case of auctioning a single item; however, subsequent decades of work have yielded little progress moving beyond a single item, leaving the design of revenue-maximizing auctions as a central open problem in the ﬁeld of mechanism design. A recent thread of work in “differentiable economics” has used tools from modern deep learning to instead learn good mechanisms. We focus on the
RegretNet architecture, which can represent auctions with arbitrary numbers of items and participants; it is trained to be empirically strategyproof, but the property is never exactly veriﬁed leaving potential loopholes for market participants to exploit. We propose ways to explicitly verify strategyproofness under a particular valuation proﬁle using techniques from the neural network veriﬁcation literature.
Doing so requires making several modiﬁcations to the RegretNet architecture in order to represent it exactly in an integer program. We train our network and produce certiﬁcates in several settings, including settings for which the optimal strategyproof mechanism is not known. 1

Introduction
Auctions are an important mechanism for allocating scarce goods, and drive billions of dollars of revenue annually in online advertising Edelman et al. [2007], sourcing Sandholm [2007], spectrum auctions Cramton [1997], Leyton-Brown et al. [2017], and myriad other verticals Milgrom [2017],
Roth [2018]. In the typical auction setting, agents who wish to bid on one or more items are presumed to have private valuations of the items, which are drawn at random from some prior valuation distribution. They then bid in the auction, possibly lying strategically about their valuation while attempting to anticipate the strategic behavior of others. The result is a potentially complicated
Bayes-Nash equilibrium; even predicting these equilibria can be difﬁcult, let alone designing auctions that have good equilibria.
This motivates the design of strategyproof auctions: these are auctions where players are incen-tivized to simply and truthfully reveal their private valuations to the auctioneer. Subject to the strategyproofness constraint, which makes player behavior predictable, it is then possible to optimize
∗equal contributions 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
the mechanism to maximize revenue. A classic strategyproof auction design is the second-price auction—coinciding with the celebrated Vickrey-Clarke-Groves (VCG) mechanism Vickrey [1961],
Clarke [1971], Groves [1973]—in which participants bid only once and the highest bidder wins, but the price paid by the winner is only the amount of the second-highest bid.
In a groundbreaking work, Myerson [1981] characterized the revenue-maximizing strategyproof auction for selling one item to many bidders. However, there has been very little progress in characterizing optimal strategyproof auctions in more general settings. Optimal mechanisms are known for some cases of auctioning two items to a single bidder Manelli and Vincent [2006], Pavlov
[2011], Haghpanah and Hartline [2014], Daskalakis et al. [2015]. The optimal strategyproof auction even for 2 agents buying 2 items is still unknown.
A more recent set of approaches involves formulating the auction design problem as a learning problem. Duetting et al. [2019] provide the general end-to-end approach which we build on in this paper. In brief, they design a neural network architecture to encode an auction mechanism, and train it on samples from the valuation distribution to maximize revenue. Their goal is to enforce, at least approximately, dominant-strategy incentive compatibility: a stronger notion than the Bayesian incentive compatibility of some other mechanism design approaches Cai et al. [2012a,b, 2013]. While they describe a number of network architectures which work in restricted settings, we focus on their
RegretNet architecture, which can be used in settings with any number of agents or items.
The training procedure for RegretNet involves performing gradient ascent on the network inputs, to
ﬁnd a good strategic bid for each player; the network is then trained to minimize the difference in utility between strategic and truthful bids—this quantity is the eponymous “regret”. The process is remarkably similar to adversarial training Madry et al. [2018], which applies robust optimization schemes to neural networks, and the desired property of strategyproofness can be thought of as a kind of adversarial robustness. Motivated by this connection, we use techniques from the adversarial robustness literature to compute certiﬁable upper bounds on the amount by which a player with a speciﬁc valuation proﬁle can improve their utility by strategically lying.
While the adversarial training approach seems effective in approximating strategyproof auction mechanisms, neural network training is fraught with local minima and suboptimal stationary points.
One can discover strategic behaviors by using simple gradient methods on RegretNet auctions, but we note that it is known from the adversarial examples literature that such results are often sub-optimal
Athalye et al. [2018] and depend strongly on the optimizer Wang et al. [2019]. For this reason, it is unclear how strategyproof the results of RegretNet training are, and how much utility can be gained through strategic behavior in such auctions.
Our goal here is to learn auction mechanisms that are not only approximately strategyproof, but that come with rigorous bounds on how much they can be exploited by strategic agents, regardless of the strategy used. We achieve this by leveraging recent ideas developed for certifying adversarial robustness of neural classiﬁers Bunel et al. [2018], Lu and Kumar [2020], Tjeng et al. [2019], and adapting them to work within an auction framework.
Our contributions.
• We initiate the study of certiﬁably strategyproof learned auction mechanisms. We see this as a step toward achieving the best of both worlds in auction design—maintaining provable properties while expanding to more general settings than could be analyzed by traditional methods.
• We develop a method for formulating an integer-programming-based certiﬁer for general learned auctions with additive valuations. This requires changes to the RegretNet archi-tecture. We replace its softmax activation with the piecewise linear sparsemax Martins and Astudillo [2016], and we present two complementary techniques for dealing with the requirement of individual rationality: either formulating a nonconvex integer program, or removing this constraint from the network architecture and adding it as a learned penalty instead.
• We provide the ﬁrst certiﬁable learned auctions for several settings, including a 2 agent, 2 item case where no known optimal auction exists; modulo computational scalability, our techniques for learning auctions and producing certiﬁcates for a given valuation proﬁle work for settings with any number of items or (additive) bidders. 2
2