Abstract
Graph convolution networks (GCNs) have become effective models for graph classiﬁcation. Similar to many deep networks, GCNs are vulnerable to adversar-ial attacks on graph topology and node attributes. Recently, a number of effective attack and defense algorithms have been designed, but no certiﬁcate of robustness has been developed for GCN-based graph classiﬁcation under topological pertur-bations with both local and global budgets. In this paper, we propose the ﬁrst certiﬁcate for this problem. Our method is based on Lagrange dualization and convex envelope, which result in tight approximation bounds that are efﬁciently computable by dynamic programming. When used in conjunction with robust training, it allows an increased number of graphs to be certiﬁed as robust. 1

Introduction
Graph convolution networks [GCNs, 1] have been shown very effective for modeling graph struc-tured data such as social networks [2] and protein interactive networks [3]. In this paper, we focus on the application of GCN to graph classiﬁcation, where given an attributed graph, the task is to predict its class label. This is different from node classiﬁcation where each node is assigned a (possibly different) label. Along with other models such as graph kernels [4, 5], GCNs have achieved strong performance in this task [6–9].
However, similar to most deep learning models, GCNs are also vulnerable to adversarial attacks that maliciously perturb the data to induce speciﬁc errors [10, 11]. These include node attacks (i.e., perturbing node features) [12–14] and topological attacks (i.e., adding or removing edges)
[11, 15]. They pose serious challenges because adversaries are often omnipresent in their typical application scenarios [16–18], and even when no manual or computerized adversary is present, it is still important to analyze the worst-case robustness of the model by treating nature as an adversary.
Since the strongest attack is often intractable to compute, an alternative approach that has recently attracted considerable interest is to construct certiﬁcates of robustness, i.e., certain sufﬁcient con-ditions which, once satisﬁed, guarantee the immunity to any admissible attack (see