Abstract
In many application settings involving networks, such as messages between users of an on-line social network or transactions between traders in ﬁnancial markets, the observed data consist of timestamped relational events, which form a continuous-time network. We propose the Community Hawkes Independent Pairs (CHIP) generative model for such networks. We show that applying spectral clustering to an aggregated adjacency matrix constructed from the CHIP model provides consistent community detection for a growing number of nodes and time duration.
We also develop consistent and computationally efﬁcient estimators for the model parameters. We demonstrate that our proposed CHIP model and estimation proce-dure scales to large networks with tens of thousands of nodes and provides superior
ﬁts than existing continuous-time network models on several real networks. 1

Introduction
A variety of complex systems in the computer, information, biological, and social sciences can be represented as a network, which consists of a set of objects (nodes) and relationships (edges) between the objects. In many application settings, we observe edges in the form of distinct events occurring between nodes over time. For example, in on-line social networks, users interact with each other through events that occur at speciﬁc time instances such as liking, mentioning, or sharing another user’s content. Such interactions form timestamped relational events, where each event is a triplet (i, j, t) denoting events from node i (sender) to node j (receiver) at timestamp t. The observation of these triplets deﬁnes a dynamic network that continuously evolves over time.
Timestamped relational event data are usually modeled by combining a point process model for the event times with a network model for the sender and receiver [1–9]. We refer to such models as continuous-time network models because they provide probabilities of observing events between two nodes during arbitrarily short time intervals. For model-based exploratory analysis and prediction of future events with relational event data, continuous-time network models are often superior to their discrete-time counterparts [10–14], which ﬁrst aggregate events over time windows to form discrete-time network “snapshots” and thus lose granularity in modeling temporal dynamics.
We propose the Community Hawkes Independent Pairs (CHIP) model, which is inspired by the recently proposed Block Hawkes Model (BHM) [9] for timestamped relational event data. Both CHIP and BHM are based on the Stochastic Block Model (SBM) for static networks [15]. In the BHM, events between different pairs of nodes belonging to the same pair of communities are dependent, which makes it difﬁcult to analyze. In contrast, for CHIP the pairs of nodes in the same community generate events according to independent univariate Hawkes processes with shared parameters, so that the number of parameters remains the same as in the BHM. The independence between node pairs enables tractable analysis of the CHIP model and more scalable estimation than the BHM. 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
Our main contributions are as follows. (1) We demonstrate that spectral clustering provides consistent community detection in the CHIP model for a growing number of nodes and time duration. (2)
We propose consistent and computationally efﬁcient estimators for the model parameters also for a growing number of nodes and time duration. (3) We show that the CHIP model provides better ﬁts to several real datasets and scales to much larger networks than existing models, including a Facebook network with over 40,000 nodes and over 800,000 events. Other point process network models have demonstrated good empirical results, but to the best of our knowledge, this work provides the ﬁrst theoretical guarantee of estimation accuracy. Our asymptotic analysis also has tremendous practical value given the scalability of our model to large networks with tens of thousands of nodes. 2