Abstract
We present a novel discriminator for GANs that improves realness and diversity of generated samples by learning a structured hypersphere embedding space using spherical circles. The proposed discriminator learns to populate realistic samples around the longest spherical circle, i.e., a great circle, while pushing unrealistic samples toward the poles perpendicular to the great circle. Since longer circles occupy larger area on the hypersphere, they encourage more diversity in representa-tion learning, and vice versa. Discriminating samples based on their corresponding spherical circles can thus naturally induce diversity to generated samples. We also extend the proposed method for conditional settings with class labels by creating a hypersphere for each category and performing class-wise discrimination and update. In experiments, we validate the effectiveness for both unconditional and conditional generation on standard benchmarks, achieving the state of the art. 1

Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [9] aim at learning to produce high-quality data samples, as observed from a target dataset. To this end, it trains a generator, which synthesizes samples, adver-sarially against a discriminator, which classiﬁes the samples into real or fake ones; the discriminator’s gradient in backpropagation guides the generator to improve the quality of the generated samples. As the gradient is difﬁcult to stabilize, recent methods [2, 10, 18, 31] have suggested using the Lipschitz continuous space for the discriminator so that its gradient is bounded under some constant with respect to input. In a similar spirit, recent work [22] introduces a hypersphere as an embedding space, which enjoys its boundedness of distances between samples and also their gradients, showing its superior performance against the precedent models.
The most important qualities of the generated samples are realness and diversity. In conventional
GAN frameworks including [22], the discriminator can be viewed as evaluating realness based on a prototype representation, i.e., the closer a generated sample is to the prototype of real samples, the more realistic it is evaluated as. The single prototype, however, may not be sufﬁcient for capturing all modes of real samples, and thus recent work [1, 7, 19, 26] attempts to tackle this issue by employing multiple discriminators, i.e., multiple prototypes. But, training with multiple discriminators requires higher memory footprints and computation costs, and also introduces another hyperparameter, i.e., the number of discriminators. Conditional GANs [17, 21] use additional information of class labels to increase the coverage of modes across different categories. However, the class label does not ensure the intra-class diversity [21] while being beneﬁcial to learn representative features of the class.
Hence, the problem of mode collapse remains even in conditional models.
In this paper, we address the sample diversity issue by learning a structured hypersphere embedding space for the discriminator in GANs. Our discriminator learns to populate realistic samples around a great circle, which is the largest spherical circle, while pushing unrealistic samples toward the poles perpendicular to the great circle. In doing so, since the longer circles occupy the larger area on the 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
hypersphere, they encourage more diversity in representation learning of realistic samples. As the result, multiple modes of real data distribution are effectively represented to guide the generator in
GAN training. We also extend the proposed method for conditional settings with class labels by creating a hypersphere for each category and performing class-wise sample discrimination and update.
In experimental evaluation, we validate the effectiveness of our approach for both unconditional and conditional generation tasks on the standard benchmarks, including STL10, CIFAR10, CIFAR100, and TinyImagenet, achieving the state of the art. 2