Abstract
Social media has created new ways for citizens to stay informed on societal matters and participate in political discourse. However, with its algorithmically-curated and virally-propagating content, social media has contributed further to the polarization of opinions by reinforcing users’ existing viewpoints. An emerging line of research seeks to understand how content-recommendation algorithms can be re-designed to mitigate societal polarization ampliﬁed by social-media interactions. In this paper, we study the problem of allocating seed users to opposing campaigns: by drawing on the equal-time rule of political campaigning on traditional media, our goal is to allocate seed users to campaigners with the aim to maximize the expected number of users who are co-exposed to both campaigns. We show that the problem of maximizing co-exposure is NP-hard and its objective function is neither submodular nor supermodular. However, by exploiting a connection to a submodular function that acts as a lower bound to the objective, we are able to devise a greedy algorithm with provable approximation guarantee. We further provide a scalable instantiation of our approximation algorithm by introducing a novel extension to the notion of random reverse-reachable sets for efﬁciently estimating the expected co-exposure. We experimentally demonstrate the quality of our proposal on real-world social networks. 1

Introduction
Social media have created new ways for citizens to stay informed and participate in societal discourse.
However, despite enabling users to access a variery of information, social media has been linked to increased societal polarization [22], by amplifying the phenomenon of echo chambers [4, 27], where users are only exposed to information from like-minded individuals, and of ﬁlter bubbles [35, 37], where algorithms only present personalized content that agrees with the user’s viewpoint. To address these concerns, an emerging line of research seeks to understand how content-recommendation algorithms can be re-designed to mitigate societal polarization ampliﬁed by social-media interactions.
Recent work includes developing methods for balancing [25] and diversifying [3] information exposure, while considering the tendency of the recommended content to spread through the online social network under a stochastic information propagation model.
In this paper, we take a step in this direction and consider the problem of breaking ﬁlter bubbles through the information-propagation lens. Following related work that has considered the problem 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
of viral marketing for multiple items in online social networks [1, 2, 12, 20, 21, 29], we consider a setting with a centralized authority (host) that is responsible for allocating seed nodes to campaigns.
We assume that two campaigns, supporting opposing sides of a controversial social issue, approach the host to beneﬁt from its viral-marketing service. By drawing on the equal-time rule of political campaigning in the pre-digital era, our aim is to devise a seed-set allocation framework so that the expected number of users who are exposed to both campaigns, through the propagation of information in the social network, is maximized.
In a traditional viral-marketing setting, both the campaigners and host would be interested in reaching out to the maximum number of people without any consideration to co-exposure [1, 2, 12, 20, 21, 29].
However, the new era of fake news and polarization has brought to the fore the fact that, algorithmic principles that work well for commercial advertising have unintended consequences when applied to political advertising, due to their commercial focus that prioritize revenue, resulting in biased and imbalanced campaigning. Such adverse effects have led to social-media platforms being held accountable for having political bias in their services. In some cases, popular social media have stopped their political advertising service at the expense of losing revenue. Thus, we assume the host has an incentive to respect balance and objectivity considerations, due to enforced legislations or social conscience.
As a step of addressing the aforementioned challenges, we formally introduce co-exposure maximiza-tion (COEM) as the problem of assigning seed sets to each campaign such that the expected number of users co-exposed to campaigns under a stochastic information propagation model is maximized.
We show that the COEM problem is NP-hard and NP-hard to approximate within a factor better than 1 − 1/e. Although the co-exposure function is neither submodular nor supermodular, we propose a greedy algorithm that exploits a connection to a submodular function that acts as the lower bound of the objective and obtain bounded approximation guarantees. Due to the #P-hardness of expected spread computation, we introduce a novel extension to the notion of random reverse-reachable sets [9] for efﬁciently estimating the expected co-exposure. Finally, we experimentally evaluate our algorithm on several real-world datasets and demonstrate its superiority over several baselines.
Omitted proofs and implementation are provided as supplementary material. 2