Abstract
We formulate the novel class of contextual games, a type of repeated games driven by contextual information at each round. By means of kernel-based regularity assumptions, we model the correlation between different contexts and game out-comes and propose a novel online (meta) algorithm that exploits such correlations to minimize the contextual regret of individual players. We deﬁne game-theoretic notions of contextual Coarse Correlated Equilibria (c-CCE) and optimal contextual welfare for this new class of games and show that c-CCEs and optimal welfare can be approached whenever players’ contextual regrets vanish. Finally, we empirically validate our results in a trafﬁc routing experiment, where our algorithm leads to better performance and higher welfare compared to baselines that do not exploit the available contextual information or the correlations present in the game. 1

Introduction
Several important real-world problems, ranging from economics, engineering, and computer science involve multiple interactions of self-interested agents with coupled objectives. They can be modeled as repeated games and have received recent attention due to their connection with learning (e.g., [11]).
An important line of research has focused, on the one hand, on characterizing game-theoretic equilibria and their efﬁciency and, on the other hand, on deriving fast learning algorithms that converge to equilibria and efﬁcient outcomes. Most of these results, however, are based on the assumption that the players always face the exact same game, repeated over time. While this leads to strong theoretical guarantees, it is often unrealistic in practical scenarios: In routing games [30], for instance, the agents’ travel times and hence the ‘rules’ of the game are governed by many time-changing factors such as network’s capacities, weather conditions, etc. Often, players can observe such factors, and hence could take better decisions depending on the circumstances.
Motivated by these considerations, we introduce the new class of contextual games. Contextual games deﬁne a more general class of repeated games described by different contextual, or side, information at each round, denoted also as contexts in analogy with the bandit optimization literature (e.g., [24]).
Importantly, in contextual games players can observe the current context before playing an action, which allows them to achieve better performance, and converge to stronger notions of equilibria and efﬁciency than in standard repeated games.