Abstract
Recommendation Systems like YouTube are vibrant ecosystems with two types of users: Content consumers (those who watch videos) and content providers (those who create videos). While the computational task of recommending relevant content is largely solved, designing a system that guarantees high social welfare for all stakeholders is still in its infancy. In this work, we investigate the dynamics of content creation using a game-theoretic lens. Employing a stylized model that was recently suggested by other works, we show that the dynamics will always converge to a pure Nash Equilibrium (PNE), but the convergence rate can be exponential.
We complement the analysis by proposing an efﬁcient PNE computation algorithm via a combinatorial optimization problem that is of independent interest. 1

Introduction
Recommendation systems (RSs hereinafter) play a major role in our life nowadays. Many modern
RSs, like YouTube, Medium, or Spotify, recommend content created by others and go far beyond recommendations. They are vibrant ecosystems with multiple stakeholders and are responsible for the well-being of all of them. For example, in the online publishing platform Medium, the platform should be proﬁtable; suggest relevant content to the content consumers (readers); and support the content providers (authors). In light of this ecosystem approach, research on RSs has shifted from determining consumers’ taste (e.g., the Netﬂix Prize challenge [9, 25]) to other aspects like fairness, ethics, and long-term welfare [5, 29, 31, 35, 37, 40–42, 44].
Understanding content providers and their utility1 is still in its infancy. Content providers produce a constant supply of content (e.g., articles in Medium, videos on YouTube), and are hence indispensable.
Successful content providers rely on the RS for some part of their income: Advertising, afﬁliated marketing, sponsorship, and merchandise; thus, unsatisﬁed content providers might decide to provide a different type of content or even abandon the RS. To illustrate, a content provider who is unsatisﬁed with her exposure, which is heavily correlated with her income from the RS, can switch to another type of content or seek another niche. Such downstream effects are detrimental to content consumer satisfaction because they change the available content the RS can recommend. The synergy between content providers and consumers is thus fragile, and solidifying one side solidiﬁes the other. 1We use the term utility to address the well-being of the content providers, and social welfare for the well-being of the content consumers. 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
In this paper, we investigate the dynamics of RSs using a stylized model in which content providers are strategic. Content providers obtain utility from displays of their content and are willing to change the content they offer to increase their utility. These ﬂuctuations change not only the utility of the providers but also the social welfare of the consumers, deﬁned as the quality of their proposed content. We show that the provider dynamics always converges to a stable point (namely, a pure Nash equilibrium), but the convergence time may be long. This observation suggests a more centralized approach, in which the RS coordinates the providers, and leads to fast convergence.
While our model is stylized, we believe it offers insights into more general, real-world RSs. The game-theoretic modeling allows counterfactual reasoning about the content that could-have-been-generated, which is impossible to achieve using existing data-sets and small online experiments. Our analysis advocates increased awareness to content providers and their incentives, a behavior that rarely exists these days in RSs.2
Our contribution We explore the ecosystem using the following game-theoretic model, and use the blogging terminology to simplify the discussion. We consider a set of players (i.e., content providers), each selects a topic to write from a predeﬁned set of topics (e.g., economics, sports, medieval movies, etc.). Each player has a quality w.r.t. each topic, quantifying relevance and attractiveness of that author’s content if she writes on that topic, and a conversion rate. Given a selection of topics (namely, a strategy proﬁle), the RS serves users who consume content. All queries concerned with a topic are modeled as the demand for that topic. The utility every player obtains is the sum of displays her content receives (affected by the demand for topics and the operating RS) multiplied by the conversion rate. The game-theoretic model we adopt in service is suggested by Ben Basat et al. [4] and is well-justiﬁed by later research [8, 42].
Technically, we deal with the question of reaching a stable point—a point in which none of the players can deviate from her selected topic and increase her utility. We are interested in the convergence time and the welfare of the system in these stable points. We ﬁrst explore the decentralized approach:
Better-response learning dynamics (see, e.g., [16, 21]), in which players asynchronously deviate to improve their utility (an arbitrary player to an arbitrary strategy, as long as she improves upon her current utility). We show that every better-response dynamic converges, thereby extending prior work [8]. Through a careful recursive construction, we show a negative result: The convergence time can be exponential in the number of topics. Long convergence time suggests a different approach. We consider the scenario in which the RS could act centrally, and support the process of matching players with topics. We devise an algorithm that computes an equilibrium fast (roughly squared in the input size). To solve this computational challenge, which is a mixture of matching and load-balancing, we propose a novel combinatorial optimization problem that is of independent interest.
Conceptually, we offer a qualitative grounding for the advantages of coordination and intervention3 in the content provider dynamics. Our analysis relies on the assumption of complete knowledge of all model parameters, in particular the qualities. While unrealistic in practice, we expect that incomplete information will only exacerbate the problems we address. The main takeaway from this paper is that
RSs are not self-regulated markets, and as much as suggesting authors topics to write on can lead to a signiﬁcant increase in the system’s stability. We discuss some practical ways of reaching this goal in
Section 5.