Abstract
We propose a distributionally robust model for the inﬂuence maximization problem.
Unlike the classic independent cascade model [16], this model’s diffusion process is adversarially adapted to the choice of seed set. Hence, instead of optimizing under the assumption that all inﬂuence relationships in the network are independent, we seek a seed set whose expected inﬂuence under the worst correlation, i.e. the
“worst-case, expected inﬂuence", is maximized. We show that this worst-case inﬂuence can be efﬁciently computed, and though the optimization is NP-hard, a (1 − 1/e) approximation guarantee holds. We also analyze the structure to the adversary’s choice of diffusion process, and contrast with established models.
Beyond the key computational advantages, we also highlight the extent to which the independence assumption may cost optimality, and provide insights from numerical experiments comparing the adversarial and independent cascade model. 1

Introduction
Social networks are models that capture transmission of information among its members. They
ﬁnd applications in testing effectiveness of policies, diffusion of medical innovations, marketing campaigns and news [34, 30, 13, 6]. Central to these models is a directed graph G = (V, E) where V denotes a set of nodes (members/users) and E a set of edges (inﬂuence relationships). In progressive diffusion models, a subset of the edges are randomly deemed “live" via a binary valued random vector
˜c of size |E|, in which ˜cij = 1 (w.p. pij) iff edge (i, j) is “live," so that given a seed set S ⊆ V , all nodes reachable along live-edge paths from S (including S itself) are activated, or “inﬂuenced."
The inﬂuence maximization problem is thus to ﬁnd a k-sized seed set S ⊆ V that maximizes the number R(˜c, S) of inﬂuenced nodes in expectation, i.e., max|S|≤k E[R(˜c, S)], where k represents, say, a viral marketing campaign’s budget constraint.
There have been many studies to model diffusion and the spread of inﬂuence in graphs ([7, 21, 32]).
In particular, [16] was seminal in studying inﬂuence maximization under the well-known Independent
Cascade (IC) model, in which all edges are independently live - equivalently, the components to
˜c are mutually independent Bernoulli random variables and we write ˜c ∼ θic. The IC inﬂuence maximization problem - max|S|≤k Eθic[R(˜c, S)] - is known to be NP-hard; in fact, even evaluating f ic(S) := Eθic[R(˜c, S)] for a seed set S is #P-hard [16], though several works have proposed efﬁcient approximation methods, and a greedy algorithm provides a 1 − 1/e − (cid:15) approximation guarantee[16], where (cid:15) > 0 accounts for sampling errors involved in the approximation of f ic(S). But beyond the computation, the independence assumption itself may not be appropriate. Indeed, while a graph may capture observable connections in a social network with edge connectivity describing friends, followers, etc., there may be latent variables causing apparently disconnected segments of
∗louis.chen@nps.edu
†divya_padmanabhan@sutd.edu.sg
‡cheechin_lim@sutd.edu.sg
§karthik_natarajan@sutd.edu.sg 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
a network to in fact display correlated capacities to propagate inﬂuence. And for that matter, the correlation could depend on the particular idea, product, or news to be propagated.
In this work, we assume knowledge of the live-edge probabilities pij but make no assumptions on the correlation(/dependence) of all ˜cij. Thus all joint distributions consistent with the marginal probabilities pij are admissible. And we propose to choose a k-sized seed set S that maximizes the expected number of inﬂuenced nodes with respect to the worst correlation. In such an adversarial model we hedge against unknown dependence structure to the random live edges, or equivalently identify a set of nodes that are inﬂuential regardless of the model.
The techniques used in this work fall under the realm of distributionally robust optimization (DRO), a research area concerned with optimizing a risk measure, under the most adverse member from a family of distributions. By introducing such an adversarial selection, decision-makers now seek decisions that would be “robust” to assuming an incorrect distribution. This approach has gained in popularity in several domains such as machine learning and game theory[10, 28, 18]. The family of distributions we consider in this work is commonly referred to as the Fréchet class (all joint distributions consistent with the given marginals) in the literature [22, 17, 5].
Contributions: (1) We ﬁrst formulate a distributionally robust model for inﬂuence maximization in Section 3. Unlike the IC model, this adversarial model allows for a polynomial time solvable linear programming formulation to obtain the worst case expected inﬂuence function, given a seed set S. The linear program contains |V | variables and O(|E| + |V |) constraints and is interpretable. (2) In Section 4, we show that ﬁnding an optimal seed set S that maximizes the worst case expected value R(˜c, S) is NP-hard. Interestingly, despite the adversarial nature of the model, we show that the worst case expected inﬂuence function is submodular in S. By using the greedy algorithm, we obtain an approximation guarantee of (1 − 1/e), with no need to resort to simulation methods. (3) We establish that if the activation events are not necessarily independent, operating under the assumption of independence can hurt the expected inﬂuence. We quantify this notion by adapting the price of correlations (POC) ratio [2] to the context of inﬂuence maximization. (4) An experimental study of using a distributionally robust model on real world datasets is provided in Section 5. The key beneﬁt offered by a distributionally robust model is computational efﬁciency and the robustness of the generated seed set to the dependence among the edges. 2