Abstract
To make decisions based on a model ﬁt with auto-encoding variational Bayes (AEVB), practitioners often let the variational distribution serve as a surrogate for the posterior distribution. This approach yields biased estimates of the expected risk, and therefore leads to poor decisions for two reasons. First, the model ﬁt with AEVB may not equal the underlying data distribution. Second, the variational distribution may not equal the posterior distribution under the ﬁtted model. We explore how ﬁtting the variational distribution based on several objective functions other than the ELBO, while continuing to ﬁt the generative model based on the
ELBO, affects the quality of downstream decisions. For the probabilistic principal component analysis model, we investigate how importance sampling error, as well as the bias of the model parameter estimates, varies across several approximate posteriors when used as proposal distributions. Our theoretical results suggest that a posterior approximation distinct from the variational distribution should be used for making decisions. Motivated by these theoretical results, we propose learning several approximate proposals for the best model and combining them using multiple importance sampling for decision-making. In addition to toy examples, we present a full-ﬂedged case study of single-cell RNA sequencing. In this challenging instance of multiple hypothesis testing, our proposed approach surpasses the current state of the art. 1

Introduction
The auto-encoding variational Bayes (AEVB) algorithm performs model selection by maximizing a lower bound on the model evidence [1, 2]. In the speciﬁc case of variational autoencoders (VAEs), a low-dimensional representation of data is transformed through a learned nonlinear function (another neural network) into the parameters of a conditional likelihood. VAEs achieve impressive performance on pattern-matching tasks like representation/manifold learning and synthetic image generation [3].
Many machine learning applications, however, require decisions, not just compact representations of the data. Researchers have accordingly attempted to use VAEs for decision-making applications, including novelty detection in control applications [4], mutation-effect prediction for genomic sequences [5], artifact detection [6], and Bayesian hypothesis testing for single-cell RNA sequencing data [7, 8]. To make decisions based on VAEs, these researchers implicitly appeal to Bayesian decision theory, which counsels taking the action that minimizes expected loss under the posterior distribution [9]. 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
However, for VAEs, the relevant functionals of the posterior cannot be computed exactly. Instead, after
ﬁtting a VAE based on the ELBO, practitioners take one of three approaches to decision-making: i) the variational distribution may be used as a surrogate for the posterior [5], ii) the variational distribution may be used as a proposal distribution for importance sampling [10], or iii) the variational distribution can be ignored once the model is ﬁt, and decisions may be based on an iterative sampling method such as MCMC or annealed importance sampling [11]. But will any of these combined procedures (ELBO for model training and one of these methods for approximating posterior expectations) produce good decisions?
They may not, for two reasons. First, estimates of the relevant expectations of the posterior may be biased and/or may have high variance. The former situation is typical when the variational distribution is substituted for the posterior; the latter is common for importance sampling estimators.
By using the variational distribution as a proposal distribution, practitioners aim to get unbiased low-variance estimates of posterior expectations. But this approach often fails. The variational distribution recovered by the VAE, which minimizes the reverse Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between the variational distribution and the model posterior, is known to systematically underestimate variance [12, 13], making it a poor choice for an importance sampling proposal distribution. Alternative inference procedures have been proposed to address this problem. For example, expectation propagation (EP) [14] and CHIVI [15] minimize the forward KL divergence and the χ2 divergence, respectively.
Both objectives have favorable properties for ﬁtting a proposal distribution [16, 17]. IWVI [10] seeks to maximize a tight lower bound of the evidence that is based on importance sampling estimates (IWELBO). Empirically, IWVI outperforms VI for estimating posterior expectations. It is unclear, however, which method to choose for a particular application.
Second, even if we can faithfully compute expectations of the model posterior, the model learned by the VAE may not resemble the real data-generating process [13]. Most VAE frameworks rely on the
IWELBO, where the variational distribution is used as a proposal [18, 19, 20]. For example, model and inference parameters are jointly learned in the IWAE [18] using the IWELBO. Similarly, the wake-wake (WW) procedure [21, 22] uses the IWELBO for learning the model parameters but seeks to ﬁnd a variational distribution that minimizes the forward KL divergence. In the remainder of this manuscript, we will use the same name to refer to either the inference procedure or the associated
VAE framework (e.g., WW will be used to refer to EP).
To address both of these issues, we propose a simple three-step procedure for making decisions with
VAEs. First, we ﬁt a model based on one of several objective functions (e.g., VAE, IWAE, WW, or χ-VAE) and select the best model based on some metric (e.g., IWELBO calculated on held-out data with a large numbers of particles). The χ-VAE is a novel variant of the WW algorithm that, for ﬁxed pθ, minimizes the χ2 divergence (for further details, see Appendix B). Second, with the model ﬁxed, we ﬁt several approximate posteriors, based on the same objective functions, as well as annealed importance sampling [11]. Third, we combine the approximate posteriors as proposal distributions for multiple importance sampling [23] to make decisions that minimize the expected loss under the posterior. In multiple importance sampling, we expect the mixture to be a better proposal than either of its components alone, especially in settings where the posterior is complex because each component can capture different parts of the posterior.
After introducing the necessary background (Section 2), we provide a complete analysis of our framework for the probabilistic PCA model [24] (Section 3). In this tractable setting, we recover the known fact that an underdispersed proposal causes severe error to importance sampling estimators [25].
The analysis also shows that overdispersion may harm the process of model learning by exacerbating existing biases in variational Bayes. We also conﬁrm these results empirically. Next, we perform an extensive empirical evaluation of two real-world decision-making problems. First, we consider a practical instance of classiﬁcation-based decision theory. In this setting, we show that the vanilla VAE becomes overconﬁdent in its posterior predictive density, which harms performance. We also show that our three-step procedure outperforms IWAE and WW (Section 4). We then present a scientiﬁc case study, focusing on an instance of multiple hypothesis testing in single-cell RNA sequencing data.
Our approach yields a better calibrated estimate of the expected posterior false discovery rate (FDR) than that computed by the current state-of-the-art method (Section 5).
Our code is available at http://github.com/PierreBoyeau/decision-making-vaes 2
2