Abstract
We present a simple and effective approach for non-blind image deblurring, com-bining classical techniques and deep learning. In contrast to existing methods that deblur the image directly in the standard image space, we propose to perform an explicit deconvolution process in a feature space by integrating a classical Wiener deconvolution framework with learned deep features. A multi-scale feature re-ﬁnement module then predicts the deblurred image from the deconvolved deep features, progressively recovering detail and small-scale structures. The proposed model is trained in an end-to-end manner and evaluated on scenarios with both simulated and real-world image blur. Our extensive experimental results show that the proposed deep Wiener deconvolution network facilitates deblurred results with visibly fewer artifacts. Moreover, our approach quantitatively outperforms state-of-the-art non-blind image deblurring methods by a wide margin. 1

Introduction
Image deblurring is a classical image restoration problem, which has attracted widespread atten-tion [e.g., 1, 3, 9, 10, 56]. It is usually formulated as y = x ∗ k + n, (1) where y, x, k, and n denote the blurry input image, the desired clear image, the blur kernel, and image noise, respectively. ∗ is the convolution operator. Traditional methods usually separate this problem into two phases, blur kernel estimation and image restoration (i.e., non-blind image deblurring). The goal of non-blind image deblurring is to restore the clear image x from its corrupted observation y given the blur kernel k. Early non-blind deblurring methods include the Wiener ﬁlter [49] and the
Richardson-Lucy algorithm [33]. Later work commonly relied on a probabilistic formulation, most often maximum a-posteriori approaches, and much research has been devoted to developing effective image priors [15, 37, 50, 56] or sophisticated data terms [8, 32]. However, the optimization problems resulting from such advanced models are difﬁcult to solve, which limits their practical appeal.
In recent years, convolutional neural networks have been exploited for image deblurring and shown promising results. To effectively exploit a-priori knowledge for non-blind image deblurring, one line of work [40, 42, 54, 55] decomposes this problem into image denoising (which is achieved by learned deep models) and image deconvolution1 (performed in the standard image space). However, the underlying deep models for image denoising are not speciﬁcally optimized for image deblurring, 1Note that deconvolution is a particular way of solving image deblurring given the blur model in Eq. (1). 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
(b) Blind [53] (a) Blurry input (c) Non-blind [8]
Figure 1: Deblurring results on a real blurry image from [50]. A recent blind image deblurring method [53], based on end-to-end trainable networks, does not effectively estimate a clear image.
With an estimated blur kernel from [29], non-blind image deblurring methods [8, 55] generate better results (c,d) than the blind method (b). Yet, our method recovers still much clearer results (e). (e) Ours (non-blind) (d) Non-blind [55] thus not effective in removing deconvolution artifacts and restoring structural detail. In addition, we observe that performing the deconvolution in the standard image space introduces undesirable artifacts and loses ﬁne-scale image detail (Fig. 1(d)). To remove artifacts, several algorithms use the information extracted by ﬁxed feature extraction operators [31, 41] or discriminatively learned ones [8, 32] in the deconvolution process. However, these methods are not effective in ﬁner-scale detail restoration (Fig. 1(c)). Another line of work adopts generic network architectures (e.g., U-Net [23, 45, 53], GANs [17]) to directly estimate the clear image from the blurry input and achieves reasonable image quality (without the blur kernel being known). Nevertheless, most of these networks do not perform well compared to established non-blind image deblurring methods if the blur kernel is known, cf. Fig. 1(b) vs. Fig. 1(c)–(d). Thus, it is of signiﬁcant interest to investigate the properties of the deconvolution process and develop effective deep models for non-blind image deblurring.
In this paper, we develop a domain-speciﬁc network that integrates a classical deconvolution technique into deep neural networks for non-blind image deblurring.
In this way, our approach deviates from existing methods [42, 55], whose deconvolution process is independent from the deep model.
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst explore the utility of the classical Wiener deconvolution and propose a feature-based Wiener deconvolution. Then we embed the feature-based Wiener deconvolution into a deep neural network, which contains a feature extraction network to provide useful features for the feature-based Wiener deconvolution and a feature reﬁnement network to further reﬁne the deconvolved features for better image reconstruction. Taken together, we ﬁnd that the feature-based Wiener deconvolution can better constrain the whole network to learn effective non-blind deblurring.
The contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows: (i) We develop a novel feature-based Wiener deconvolution module that enforces the estimated latent image to coincide with the degradation process in a (deep) feature space. A detailed analysis demonstrates that a feature-space deconvolution is more effective in suppressing artifacts and recovering ﬁne detail compared to previous methods that conduct the deconvolution in the image space. Learned deep features further improve the results. (ii) We then propose a multi-scale feature reﬁnement module to restore the
ﬁne-scale structures of the deconvolved features, facilitating the reconstruction of high-quality images.
The whole network is trained in an end-to-end manner. (iii) Beneﬁtting from the feature-based Wiener deconvolution, our approach adaptively estimates the noise level from the blurry features, which ensures that training a single instance of the proposed deep Wiener deconvolution network is able to handle various levels of noise. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods that require the noise level to be known by a large margin. 2