Abstract
We propose a novel unsupervised learning approach to 3D shape correspondence that builds a multiscale matching pipeline into a deep neural network. This approach is based on smooth shells, the current state-of-the-art axiomatic correspondence method, which requires an a priori stochastic search over the space of initial poses.
Our goal is to replace this costly preprocessing step by directly learning good initializations from the input surfaces. To that end, we systematically derive a fully differentiable, hierarchical matching pipeline from entropy regularized optimal transport. This allows us to combine it with a local feature extractor based on smooth, truncated spectral convolution ﬁlters. Finally, we show that the proposed unsupervised method signiﬁcantly improves over the state-of-the-art on multiple datasets, even in comparison to the most recent supervised methods. Moreover, we demonstrate compelling generalization results by applying our learned ﬁlters to examples that signiﬁcantly deviate from the training set. 1

Introduction
Computing shape correspondence is a fundamental component in understanding the 3D world, and is at the heart of many applications in computer vision and graphics. It is also a notoriously hard problem and a multitude of different solutions have been proposed over the years. Classical axiomatic methods make assumptions about the geometric properties of the input surfaces, like small local distortions, to compute correspondences for a well-deﬁned class of objects. Many such methods rely on hand-crafted features [40, 39, 3] and most of them make restrictive assumptions about the discretization, topology or morphology of the considered objects. A promising venture for extending shape matching methods to a broader range of inputs is to apply machine learning to geometric data. While deep learning has achieved great success in the ﬁeld of image analysis, extending the power of deep networks to non-Euclidean data remains an important and very actively studied open challenge. Although there has been much progress, many methods to date lack a strong geometric foundation that fully acknowledges the underlying structure of 3D surfaces. A recent line of research pioneered by [20] aims at combining a learnable local feature extractor with the axiomatic approach functional maps [26]. This combination of machine learning with axiomatic methods is an important breakthrough since it allows us to integrate geometric priors into our model which can signiﬁcantly enhance the learning process. Most follow up work inspired by deep functional maps [20] use functional maps as a matching layer. The underlying assumption of these approaches is that the input pairs are nearly isometric. This manifests in energy functions that try to preserve intrinsic quantities like the Laplace-Beltrami operator [34, 10] or geodesic distances [14]. As a consequence, 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
current state-of-the-art methods require expensive postprocessing via an axiomatic method and they typically do not generalize well to previously unseen data and non-isometric pairs. Instead of the purely intrinsic functional maps method, we build upon more recent advances in extrinsic-intrinsic axiomatic shape matching [11].
Contribution In this work, we systematically derive a deepiﬁed version of the current state-of-the-art axiomatic shape correspondence method smooth shells [11] from optimal transport. This allows us to integrate it into an end-to-end trainable deep network and learn optimal local features.
Most prior work improves hand-crafted input features independently per vertex using shared weights.
We show that this approach tends to be unstable for imperfect inputs. Instead, we use a manifold
CNN architecture based on smooth spectral ﬁlters [7, 15]. Our geometric loss function measures the alignment tightness of the obtained matching which can be computed without any supervision.
Finally, we show quantitative results that compare favorably to the state-of-the-art, both in terms of axiomatic and machine learning methods. In comparison to closely related learning approaches, the strong geometric nature of our method yields high-quality correspondences without the need for expensive pre or postprocessing. 2