Abstract
In this paper, we address several inadequacies of current video object segmenta-tion pipelines. Firstly, a cyclic mechanism is incorporated to the standard semi-supervised process to produce more robust representations. By relying on the accurate reference mask in the starting frame, we show that the error propagation problem can be mitigated. Next, we introduce a simple gradient correction mod-ule, which extends the ofﬂine pipeline to an online method while maintaining the efﬁciency of the former. Finally we develop cycle effective receptive ﬁeld (cycle-ERF) based on gradient correction to provide a new perspective into analyzing object-speciﬁc regions of interests. We conduct comprehensive experiments on challenging benchmarks of DAVIS17 and Youtube-VOS, demonstrating that the cyclic mechanism is beneﬁcial to segmentation quality. 1

Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) is garnering more attention in recent years due to its widespread application in the area of video editing and analysis. Among all the VOS scenarios, semi-supervised video object segmentation is the most practical and widely researched. Speciﬁcally, a mask is provided in the ﬁrst frame indicating the location and boundary of the objects, and the algorithm should accurately segment the same objects from the background in subsequent frames.
A natural solution toward the problem is to process videos in sequential order; this exploits the information from previous frames and guides the segmentation process in the current frame. In most practical scenarios, the video is processed in an online manner where only previous knowledge is available. Due to this reason, most state-of-the-art pipelines [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] follow a sequential order for segmentation in both training and inference stages. Ideally, if the masks predicted for intermediate frames are sufﬁciently accurate, they can provide more helpful object-speciﬁc features and position prior to segmentation. Besides, the existence of prediction errors at intermediate frames can be problematic — these masks can mislead the segmentation procedure in future frames. Figure 1 illustrates an example of such error propagation risk in sequential video object segmentation pipelines.
As the algorithm is misled by another camel of similar appearance in the background, the segmented
∗equal contribution
†Correspondance author 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
Figure 1: An example of error propagation risk during the inference time. background camel will serve as erroneous guidance to future frames. Consequently the algorithm will gradually focus on both the foreground and background objects in upcoming new frames.
Based on these observations, in this paper, we propose to train and apply a segmentation network in cyclical fashion. In contrast to the predicted reference masks, the initial reference mask provided in the starting frame is always perfectly accurate and reliable (under semi-supervised mode). This inspires us to explicitly bridge the relationship between the initial reference mask and objective frame by taking the ﬁrst reference mask as a measurement of prediction. This way, we can further reﬁne the intermediate mask prediction and guide the network to learn more robust feature representation of cross frame correspondence, which is less prone to background distractors.
In this work, we apply a forward-backward data ﬂow to form a cyclical structure, and train our segmentation network at both the objective frame and starting frame to help our model learn more robust correspondence relationship between predictions and the initial reference mask. Further to this, at the inference stage, we design a gradient correction module to selectively reﬁne the predicted mask based on the gradient backward from the starting frame. In this way, we are able to naturally extend the ofﬂine trained model to an online scheme with marginal increase in time latency. Furthermore, we train our model under such cyclic consistency constraint without additional annotated data from other tasks. The trained models are evaluated in both online and ofﬂine schemes on common object segmentation benchmarks: DAVIS17 [10] and Youtube-VOS [11], in which we achieve results that are competitive to other state-of-the-art methods while keeping the efﬁciency on par with most ofﬂine approaches.
Additionally, inspired by the process of gradient correction, we develop a new receptive ﬁeld visualization method called cycle effective receptive ﬁeld (cycle-ERF), which gradually updates an empty objective mask to show the strong response area w.r.t. the reference mask. In our experiments, we utilize the cycle-ERF to analyze how the cyclic training scheme affects the support regions of objects. This visualization method provides a fresh perspective for analyzing how the segmentation network extracts regions of interests from guidance masks.
In a nutshell, the contribution of this paper can be summarized as follows:
• We incorporate cycle consistency into the training process of a semi-supervised video object segmentation network to mitigate the error propagation problem. We achieved competitive results on mainstream benchmarks.
• We design a gradient correction module to extend the ofﬂine segmentation network to an online approach, which boosts the model performance with marginal increase in computation cost.
• We develop cycle-ERF, a new visualization method to analyze the important regions for object mask prediction which offers explainability on the impact of cyclic training. 2