Abstract
Recent advances in neuroscience data acquisition allow for the simultaneous record-ing of large populations of neurons across multiple brain areas while subjects perform complex cognitive tasks. Interpreting these data requires us to index how task-relevant information is shared across brain regions, but this is often confounded by the mixing of different task parameters at the single neuron level.
Here, inspired by a method developed for a single brain area, we introduce a new technique for demixing variables across multiple brain areas, called demixed shared component analysis (dSCA). dSCA decomposes population activity into a few components, such that the shared components capture the maximum amount of shared information across brain regions while also depending on relevant task parameters. This yields interpretable components that express which variables are shared between different brain regions and when this information is shared across time. To illustrate our method, we reanalyze two datasets recorded during decision-making tasks in rodents and macaques. We ﬁnd that dSCA provides new insights into the shared computation between different brain areas in these datasets, relating to several different aspects of decision formation. 1

Introduction
Recent methodological advances make it possible to record thousands of neurons simultaneously
[1]. Although such high-dimensional recording yields insights that are not apparent from studying single neuron activity, analysing population data remains a non-trivial problem because of the heterogeneity of responses and ‘mixing’ of encoded variables observed in neural data [2]. While traditionally such heterogeneity was discarded by simply averaging across neurons, more recently several dimensionality reduction methods have been developed for neurophysiological data that isolate key features of the population response structure [3]. One popular approach is demixed principal component analysis (dPCA; [4, 5]). dPCA identiﬁes components that explain maximum population variance while also ‘demixed’ from non-interesting task parameters, in other words depending upon key task parameters. This allows experimenters to combine rich population recordings with equally rich task design, as dPCA isolates low-dimensional components that vary along axes deﬁned by features of the experimental task.
∗Corresponding author.
†These authors contributed equally. 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
Besides the number of neurons recorded, neuroscientists are also experiencing a revolution in the number of brain areas recorded. This is fascinating because the brain is a connected system comprised of functionally specialised areas that interact with each other to produce complex behaviors. Recently, researchers have started to investigate interactions between populations of neurons in distinct areas for motor control [6], visual processing [7] or perceptual decision making [8]. Similar to studies examining population responses in a single brain region, these studies have applied dimensionality reduction methods to examine information shared across regions - including principal component analysis (PCA; [6]), reduced rank regression (RRR; [7]), or canonical correlation analysis (CCA;
[8]).
However, while these approaches all yield important insights into cross-regional information sharing, they cannot identify when and what task parameters are shared across regions. This limits our understanding of how information is shared across regions during cognitive tasks. It is known that the task parameters are mixed at the level of single neuron [9] or low-dimensional components obtained by standard dimensionality reduction methods [10]. Thus, it is important to properly demix each of closely related but distinct task parameters, for example, those encoding decision input, choice formation and motor output during decision making tasks [11, 12]. It is also important to identify precise timing of information sharing because relevant cross-areal information sharing may only occur at any speciﬁc timing during the entire task-related processing.
Here, inspired by the approach taken by dPCA, we propose a method for identifying shared com-ponents across two areas that is speciﬁc to a task parameter of interest in a time-resolved manner.
The key idea is to ‘marginalize’ neural population activity in a single area to demix a speciﬁc task parameter of interest, while maximizing the information shared by the two areas with a time lag. We call this procedure demixed shared component analysis (dSCA). 3
Our contributions are summarized as follows: 1. We brieﬂy review previous methods, emphasizing that they cannot identify what and when task parameters are shared across brain regions. 2. Motivated by this fact, we propose dSCA to isolate the contribution of a task parameter of interest to the shared information between different brain areas. Using a simulation analysis in Sect. 3 we show that dSCA ﬁnds shared components that are demixed into speciﬁc task parameters of interest in a time-resolved manner, while previous CCA or RRR fail. 3. We reanalyze two previously published decision making datasets [8, 13] and show that dSCA captures shared components among different brain areas that is speciﬁc to task parameters such as decision input, stimulus valuation, attentional reorienting and choice formation. 2