Abstract
Signed networks are graphs where edges are annotated with a positive or negative sign, indicating whether an edge interaction is friendly or antagonistic. Signed net-works can be used to study a variety of social phenomena, such as mining polarized discussions in social media, or modeling relations of trust and distrust in online review platforms. In this paper we study the problem of detecting k conﬂicting groups in a signed network. Our premise is that each group is positively connected internally and negatively connected with the other k − 1 groups. A distinguishing aspect of our formulation is that we are not searching for a complete partition of the signed network; instead, we allow a subset of nodes to be neutral with respect to the conﬂict structure we are searching. As a result, the problem we tackle differs from previously-studied problems, such as correlation clustering and k-way partitioning.
To solve the conﬂicting-group discovery problem, we derive a novel formulation in which each conﬂicting group is naturally characterized by the solution to the maximum discrete Rayleigh’s quotient (MAX-DRQ) problem. We present two spec-tral methods for ﬁnding approximate solutions to the MAX-DRQ problem, which we analyze theoretically. Our experimental evaluation shows that, compared to state-of-the-art baselines, our methods ﬁnd solutions of higher quality, are faster, and recover ground-truth conﬂicting groups with higher accuracy. 1

Introduction
Signed networks are graphs where each edge is labeled either positive or negative. The introduction of edge signs, which goes back to the 50’s, was motivated by the study of friendly and antagonistic social relationships [22]. The representation power of signed networks comes at the cost of signiﬁcant differences in fundamental graph properties, and thus, algorithmic techniques employed to analyze unsigned networks are usually not directly applicable to their signed counterparts. These differences have spurred signiﬁcant interest in a variety of analysis tasks in signed networks [20, 36] such as signed network embeddings [7, 24, 25, 39], signed clustering [8, 14, 27, 32], and signed link prediction [9, 28, 38, 41] in recent years.
In this paper we study the problem of detecting k conﬂicting groups in signed networks. In more detail, we are interested in ﬁnding a collection of k vertex subsets, each of which is positively con-nected internally, and negatively connected to the other k − 1 subsets. In social networks where edge signs indicate positive or negative interactions, identifying conﬂicting groups may help in the study of polarization [1, 31, 40, 43], echo chambers [17, 19] and the spread of fake news [12, 35, 42].
Detecting k conﬂicting groups is challenging due to various reasons. First, conﬂicting groups are not simply dense subgraphs, so community-detection techniques for unsigned graphs are not effective.
Second, in real applications we can expect a majority of the network nodes to be neutral with respect 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
to the conﬂicting structure. As an example, consider a social network where a heated discussion is taking place between different political factions. Most users might not get involved in the quarrel, and thus their interactions are not necessarily consistent with this division. For this reason, methods for signed networks like correlation clustering and k-way partitioning may not be effective.
Our approach for detecting k-conﬂicting groups in signed networks extends the formulation of Bonchi et al. [4], to arbitrary values of k, addressing an open problem left in that work, which studied only the case k = 2. We argue that simply rounding the principal eigenvectors of the adjacency matrix might yield unsatisfactory results. Instead, we show that the proposed objective can be interpreted in terms of the Laplacian of a complete graph, and rely on the spectral properties of this matrix to derive a novel optimization framework, spectral conﬂicting group detection (SCG). By carefully examining the invariant subspaces of the aforementioned Laplacian, we reformulate the problem as a maximum discrete Rayleigh quotient (MAX-DRQ) objective, which is an APX-hard problem. We propose two algorithms, one deterministic, and one randomized with approximation guarantees. We show that the obtained approximation is essentially the best possible, when using the largest eigenvalue as an upper bound.
We perform an extensive set of experiments to compare the performance of our approach to that of multiple alternatives from the literature, on a variety of synthetic and real datasets. Our algorithms generally run faster, yield solutions of higher quality, and exhibit a better ability to ﬁnd ground-truth groups than competing methods. In addition, we discuss how to select the number of groups k in practical scenarios. 2