Abstract
Multi-agent interacting systems are prevalent in the world, from purely physical systems to complicated social dynamic systems. In many applications, effective understanding of the situation and accurate trajectory prediction of interactive agents play a signiﬁcant role in downstream tasks, such as decision making and planning. In this paper, we propose a generic trajectory forecasting framework (named EvolveGraph) with explicit relational structure recognition and prediction via latent interaction graphs among multiple heterogeneous, interactive agents.
Considering the uncertainty of future behaviors, the model is designed to provide multi-modal prediction hypotheses. Since the underlying interactions may evolve even with abrupt changes, and different modalities of evolution may lead to different outcomes, we address the necessity of dynamic relational reasoning and adaptively evolving the interaction graphs. We also introduce a double-stage training pipeline which not only improves training efﬁciency and accelerates convergence, but also enhances model performance. The proposed framework is evaluated on both synthetic physics simulations and multiple real-world benchmark datasets in various areas. The experimental results illustrate that our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance in terms of prediction accuracy. 1

Introduction
Multi-agent trajectory prediction is critical in many real-world applications, such as autonomous driving, mobile robot navigation and other areas where a group of entities interact with each other, giving rise to complicated behavior patterns at the level of both individuals and the multi-agent system as a whole. Since usually only the trajectories of individual entities are available without any knowledge of the underlying interaction patterns, and there are usually multiple possible modalities for each agent, it is challenging to model such dynamics and forecast their future behaviors.
There have been a number of existing works trying to provide a systematic solution to multi-agent interaction modeling. Some related techniques include, but not limited to social pooling layers [1], attention mechanisms [42, 19, 12, 40, 21], message passing over graphs [8, 37, 22], etc. These techniques can be summarized as implicit interaction modeling by information aggregation. Another line of research is to explicitly perform inference over the structure of the latent interaction graph, which allows for relational structures with multiple interaction types [18, 2]. Our approach falls into this category but with signiﬁcant extension and performance enhancement over existing methods.
A closely related work is NRI [18], in which the interaction graph is static with homogeneous nodes during training. This is sufﬁcient for the systems involving homogeneous type of agents with ﬁxed
∗indicates equal contribution
†Work done during Jiachen’s internship at Honda Research Institute, USA. 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
interaction patterns. In many real-world scenarios, however, the underlying interactions are inherently varying even with abrupt changes (e.g. basketball players). And there may be heterogeneous types of agents (e.g. cars, pedestrians, cyclists, etc.) involved in the system, while NRI cannot distinguish them explicitly. Moreover, NRI does not deal with the multi-modality explicitly in future system behaviors. In this work, we address the problem of 1) extracting the underlying interaction patterns with a latent graph structure, which is able to handle different types of agents in a uniﬁed way, 2) capturing the dynamics of interaction graph evolution for dynamic relational reasoning, 3) predicting future trajectories (state sequences) based on the historical observations and the latent interaction graph, and 4) capturing the multi-modality of future system behaviors.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as:
•
•
•
•
We propose a generic trajectory forecasting framework with explicit interaction modeling via a latent graph among multiple heterogeneous, interactive agents. Both trajectory information and context information (e.g. scene images, semantic maps, point cloud density maps) can be incorporated into the system.
We propose a dynamic mechanism to evolve the underlying interaction graph adaptively along time, which captures the dynamics of interaction patterns among multiple agents. We also introduce a double-stage training pipeline which not only improves training efﬁciency and accelerates convergence, but also enhances model performance in terms of prediction accuracy.
The proposed framework is designed to capture the uncertainty and multi-modality of future trajectories in nature from multiple aspects.
We validate the proposed framework on both synthetic simulations and trajectory forecasting benchmarks in different areas. Our EvolveGraph achieves the state-of-the-art performance consistently. 2