Abstract
Graphs have been widely adopted to denote structural connections between enti-ties. The relations are in many cases heterogeneous, but entangled together and denoted merely as a single edge between a pair of nodes. For example, in a social network graph, users in different latent relationships like friends and colleagues, are usually connected via a bare edge that conceals such intrinsic connections. In this paper, we introduce a novel graph convolutional network (GCN), termed as factorizable graph convolutional network (FactorGCN), that explicitly disentangles such intertwined relations encoded in a graph. FactorGCN takes a simple graph as input, and disentangles it into several factorized graphs, each of which represents a latent and disentangled relation among nodes. The features of the nodes are then aggregated separately in each factorized latent space to produce disentangled features, which further leads to better performances for downstream tasks. We eval-uate the proposed FactorGCN both qualitatively and quantitatively on the synthetic and real-world datasets, and demonstrate that it yields truly encouraging results in terms of both disentangling and feature aggregation. Code is publicly available at https://github.com/ihollywhy/FactorGCN.PyTorch. 1

Introduction
Disentangling aims to factorize an entity, like a feature vector, into several interpretable components, so that the behavior of a learning model can be better understood. In recent years, many approaches have been proposed towards tackling disentangling in deep neural networks and have achieved promis-ing results. Most prior efforts, however, have been focused on the disentanglement of convolutional neural network (CNN) especially the auto-encoder architecture, where disentangling takes place during the stage of latent feature generation. For example, VAE [1] restrains the distribution of the latent features to Gaussian and generates disentangled representation; β-VAE [2] further improves the disentangling by introducing β to balance the independence constraints and reconstruction accuracy.
Despite the many prior efforts in CNN disentangling, there are few endeavors toward disentangling in the irregular structural domain, where graph convolutional network (GCN) models are applied.
Meanwhile, the inherent differences between grid-like data and structural data precludes applying
CNN-based disentangling methods to GCN ones. The works of [3, 4], as pioneering attempts, focus on the node-level neighbour partition and ignore the latent multi-relations among nodes.
We introduce in this paper a novel GCN, that aims to explicitly conduct graph-level disentangling, based on which convolutional features are aggregated. Our approach, termed as factorizable graph
∗Corresponding author. 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
Figure 1: Illustration of one layer in the proposed FactorGCN. It contains three steps: Disentangling,
Aggregation, and Merging. In the disentangling step, the input graph is decomposed into several factor graphs, each of which represents a latent relation among nodes. In the aggregation step, GCNs are applied separately to the derived factor graphs and produce the latent features. In the merging step, features from all latent graphs are concatenated to form the ﬁnal features, which are block-wise interpretable. convolutional network (FactorGCN), takes as input a simple graph, and decomposes it into several factor graphs, each of which corresponds to a disentangled and interpretable relation space, as shown in Fig. 1. Each such graph then undergoes a GCN, tailored to aggregate features only from one disentangled latent space, followed by a merging operation that concatenates all derived features from disentangled spaces, so as to produce the ﬁnal block-wise interpretable features. These steps constitute one layer of the proposed FactorGCN. As the output graph with updated features share the identical topology as input, nothing prevents us from stacking a number of layers to disentangle the input data at different levels, yielding a hierarchical disentanglement with various numbers of factor graph at different levels.
FactorGCN, therefore, potentially ﬁnds application in a wide spectrum of scenarios. In many real-world graphs, multiple heterogeneous relations between nodes are mixed and collapsed to one single edge. In the case of social networks, two people may be friends, colleagues, and living in the same city simultaneously, but linked via one single edge that omits such interconnections; in the co-purchasing scenario [5], products are bought together for different reasons like promotion, and functional complementary, but are often ignored in the graph construction. FactorGCN would, in these cases, deliver a disentangled and interpretable solution towards explaining the underlying rationale, and provide discriminant learned features for the target task.
Speciﬁcally, the contributions of FactorGCN are summarized as follows.
• Graph-level Disentangling. FactorGCN conducts disentangling and produces block-wise interpretable node features by analyzing the whole graph all at once, during which process the global-level topological semantics, such as the higher-order relations between edges and nodes, is explicitly accounted for. The disentangled factor graphs reveal latent-relation speciﬁc interconnections between the entities of interests, and yield interpretable features that beneﬁt the downstream tasks. This scheme therefore contrasts to the prior approaches of [3, 4], where the disentanglement takes place only within a local neighborhood, without accounting for global contexts.
• Multi-relation Disentangling. Unlike prior methods that decode only a single attribute for a neighboring node, FactorGCN enables multi-relation disentangling, meaning that the center node may aggregate information from a neighbour under multiple types of relations.
This mechanism is crucial since real-world data may contain various relations among the same pair of entities. In the case of a social network graph, for example, FactorGCN would 2
produce disentangled results allowing for two users to be both friends and living in the same city; such multi-relation disentangling is not supported by prior GCN methods.
• Quantitative Evaluation Metric. Existing quantitative evaluation methods [6, 7] in the grid domain rely on generative models, like auto-encoder [8] or GAN [9]. Yet in the irregular domain, unfortunately, state-of-the-art graph generative models are only applicable for generating small graphs or larger ones without features. Moreover, these models comprise a sequential generation step, making it infeasible to be integrated into the graph disentangling frameworks. To this end, we propose a graph edit-distance based metric, which bypasses the generation step and estimates the similarity between the factor graphs and the ground truth.
We conducted experiments on ﬁve datasets in various domains, and demonstrate that the proposed
FactorGCN yields state-of-the-art performances for both disentanglement and downstream tasks.
This indicates that, even putting side its disentangling capability, FactorGCN may well serve as a general GCN framework. Speciﬁcally, on the ZINC dataset [10], FactorGCN outperforms other methods by a large margin, and, without the bond information of the edges, FactorGCN achieves a performance on par with the state-of-the-art method that explicitly utilizes edge-type information. 2