Abstract
The theory of discrete-time online learning has been successfully applied in many problems that involve sequential decision-making under uncertainty. However, in many applications including contractual hiring in online freelancing platforms and server allocation in cloud computing systems, the outcome of each action is observed only after a random and action-dependent time. Furthermore, as a consequence of certain ethical and economic concerns, the controller may impose deadlines on the completion of each task, and require fairness across different groups in the allocation of total time budget B. In order to address these ap-plications, we consider continuous-time online learning problem with fairness considerations, and present a novel framework based on continuous-time utility maximization. We show that this formulation recovers reward-maximizing, max-min fair and proportionally fair allocation rules across different groups as special cases. We characterize the optimal ofﬂine policy, which allocates the total time be-tween different actions in an optimally fair way (as deﬁned by the utility function), and impose deadlines to maximize time-efﬁciency. In the absence of any statistical knowledge, we propose a novel online learning algorithm based on dual ascent optimization for time averages, and prove that it achieves (cid:101)O(B−1/2) regret bound. 1

Introduction
With the prevalence of automated decision methods and machine learning methods, it is important to analyze the impact of learning and evaluate models not only with respect to traditional objectives such as reward or model accuracy, but also to account for the impact on individuals that interact with the system. Indeed, there are many studies highlighting algorithmic discrimination due to problems in the machine learning pipeline: imbalance in data [1], learnt representations [2, 3], choice of model proxies [4], demographic group-dependent difference in error rates of the learned models [5, 6, 7], to name a few. With rising ethical and legal concerns, addressing such issues has become urgent, specially as these impact critical societal decisions involving job opportunities and hiring. In 2014, it was estimated that 25% of the total workforce in the US was involved in some form of freelancing, and this number was predicted to grow to 40% by 2020 [8]. In reality, this percentage might be much higher, due to COVID-19 restrictions leading to increased work-from-home and changes in job opportunities [9, 10]. In online platforms however, there has been a strong evidence of bias observed in number of user reviews and user ratings4 on completing jobs with signiﬁcant correlations
∗Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801
†H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta,
GA 30332
‡Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210 4The mean (median) normalized rating score for White workers was 0.98 (1), while it is 0.97 (1) for Black workers on TASKRABBIT. The mean (median) rating of White workers was found to be 3.3 (4.8), 3.0 (4.6) for
Black workers, 3.3 (4.8) for Asian workers, 3.6 (4.8) for workers with a picture that does not depict a person, and 1.7 (0.0) for workers with no image on FIVERR [11]. 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
Figure 1: Freelancer proﬁles on UPWORK with their past performance and corresponding reviews for “ﬁxed-price" contracts. Contractors can access these proﬁles and allocate ﬁxed-timed contracts with deadlines. with race, gender, location of work and length of proﬁles5 [11]. Motivated by these problems in online contractual hiring, we study a theoretical framework for sequential resource allocation to workers, where the controller (decision maker) can enforce deadlines for each task’s completion. Our key contribution is to quantify impact of reward maximization in terms of equality of opportunity for jobs and develop algorithms that can achieve a meaningful trade-off between these via online utility maximization. The challenge is to maximize total reward within a given time budget, while accounting for random completion times by workers from different groups and fairness in allocation.
Formally, we consider K groups of individuals who can be hired sequentially for each task, i.e., at any point, exactly one individual can be hired. If an individual from group k ∈ [K] is chosen for the n-th task and given a contractual deadline t by the controller, he/she generates a random reward of Rk,n if the task is completed by (random) time Xk,n within deadline t. If the task is not completed by the deadline, the reward obtained by the controller is zero and the time until the deadline is wasted (i.e., yields 0 reward for the controller). Completion times and reward distributions are assumed group-dependent and i.i.d. across tasks. The objective of the controller is to maximize utility (trade-off between total reward and fair allocation) in the ofﬂine (known distributions) and online settings (unknown distributions) under a budget constraint on time. As we will show in this paper, controlled deadlines set are essential for optimal time-efﬁciency under the budget constraint.
The ethical problems we are concerned with involve the rate of jobs allocated to different demographic groups and the deadlines imposed on these under reward maximization regimes [11]. Our sequential framework would also apply to other settings, for e.g., comparative clinical trials with varying follow-up durations as well as to server allocation in cloud computing where jobs are drawn from different application groups and must commit computational resources until a speciﬁc amount of time due to service level agreements (Section 2). We will often focus on the ﬁrst application involving online contractual hiring, since fairness concerns are most naturally motivated in this domain.
Given a time budget constraint B and the diverse random nature of completion time and reward pairs, the main question we consider is how to decide distribution of tasks and deadlines between different groups of people. Two potential extreme allocations are: (i) Reward-maximizing task allocation: The controller assigns all tasks to the most rewarding group to maximize the total reward within the given time budget. The other groups do not get any chance to receive tasks. (ii) Proportional task allocation:
The controller completely ignores the reward distributions, and attempts to give equal time share to each group. In other words, each group receives a fraction of the tasks inversely proportional to their mean completion times. There is clearly a trade-off between the reward maximization and equal time-share considerations in continuous-time sequential task allocation, and well-chosen utility functions [12] can be helpful in modeling this in a uniﬁed way. In this paper, we consider a very general class of utility functions, which recovers broadly used fairness criteria such as proportional fairness, max-min fairness, reward maximization among many others [13, 14, 12]. The controller can determine her priorities in terms of notions of fairness and model the task allocation problem by choosing the utility function accordingly.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows: 1. Incorporation of random completion time dynamics and fairness in allocation: In discrete-time online learning models, each action is assumed to take a unit completion time, thus the 5Mean (median) number of reviews: for women 33 (11), 59 (15) for men on TASKRABBIT. Mean (median) number of reviews: for Black workers was found to be 65 (4), 104 (6) for White workers, 101 (8) for Asian workers, 94 (10) for non-human pictures and 18 (0) for users with no image on FIVERR [11]. 2
random and diverse nature of task completion times, as required in many fundamental real-life applications, is ignored. In this work, we incorporate this aspect and develop a sequential learning framework in continuous time using tools from the theory of renewal processes and stochastic control. We show how controlled deadlines improve the time-efﬁciency in continuous-time decision processes. Moreover, this is the ﬁrst work, to the best of our knowledge, that analyzes fair distribution policies in online contractual hiring. 2. Characterization of Approximately Optimal Ofﬂine Policies: As a consequence of the random and controlled task completion times, the optimal policy for fair resource allocation is PSPACE-hard akin to unbounded stochastic knapsack problems. For tractability in design and analysis, we propose an approximation to the optimal ofﬂine policy based on Lagrange duality and renewal theory, and prove that it is asymptotically optimal. These approximate policies allocate tasks independently with respect to a ﬁxed probability distribution. 3. Online learning for utility maximization: For utility maximization in an online setting with full information feedback, we develop a novel and low-computational-complexity online learning algorithm based on dynamic stochastic optimization methods for time averages, and show that it achieves ˜O(B−1/2) regret for a time budget B. The optimal ofﬂine control policy in this paper is time-dependent, randomized and attempts to optimize time averages unlike the reward maximization problems in discrete-time problems. Despite these, the online learning algorithm we developed adapts to the randomness in completion time-reward pairs, and achieves optimal performance with vanishing regret at a fast rate.