Abstract
Clustering is an important topic in algorithms, and has a number of applications in machine learning, computer vision, statistics, and several other research disciplines.
Traditional objectives of graph clustering are to ﬁnd clusters with low conductance.
Not only are these objectives just applicable for undirected graphs, they are also incapable to take the relationships between clusters into account, which could be crucial for many applications. To overcome these downsides, we study directed graphs (digraphs) whose clusters exhibit further “structural” information amongst each other. Based on the Hermitian matrix representation of digraphs, we present a nearly-linear time algorithm for digraph clustering, and further show that our proposed algorithm can be implemented in sublinear time under reasonable as-sumptions. The signiﬁcance of our theoretical work is demonstrated by extensive experimental results on the UN Comtrade Dataset: the output clustering of our algorithm exhibits not only how the clusters (sets of countries) relate to each other with respect to their import and export records, but also how these clusters evolve over time, in accordance with known facts in international trade. 1

Introduction
Clustering is one of the most fundamental problems in algorithms and has applications in many research ﬁelds including machine learning, network analysis, and statistics. Data can often be represented by a graph (e.g., users in a social network, servers in a communication network), and this makes graph clustering a natural choice to analyse these datasets. Over the past three decades, most studies on undirected graph clustering have focused on the task of partitioning with respect to the edge densities, i.e., vertices form a cluster if they are better connected to each other than to the rest of the graph. The well-known normalised cut value [25] and graph conductance [20] capture these classical deﬁnitions of clusters, and have become the objective functions of most undirected graph clustering algorithms.
While the design of these algorithms has received a lot of research attention from both theoretical and applied research areas, these algorithms are usually unable to uncover higher-order structural information among clusters in directed graphs (digraphs). For example, let us look at the international oil trade network [29], which employs digraphs to represent how mineral fuels and oils are imported and exported between countries. Although this highly connected digraph presents little cluster structure with respect to a typical objective function of undirected graph clustering, from an economic point of view this digraph clearly exhibits a structure of clusters: there is a cluster of countries mainly exporting oil, a cluster mainly importing oil, and several clusters in the middle of this trade chain.
All these clusters are characterised by the imbalance of the edge directions between clusters, and further present a clear ordering reﬂecting the overall trade pattern. This type of structure is not only found in trade data, but also in many other types of data such as migration data and infectious disease
∗steinar9@gmail.com 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
spreading data. We view these types of patterns as a higher-order structure among the clusters and, in our point of view, this structural information could be as important as the individual clusters themselves.
Our contribution.
In this work we study clustering algorithms for digraphs whose cluster structure is deﬁned with respect to the imbalance of edge densities as well as the edge directions between the clusters. Formally, for any set of vertices S0, . . . , Sk−1 that forms a partition of the vertex set V (G) of a digraph G, we deﬁne the ﬂow ratio of {Sj}k−1 j=0 by k−1 (cid:88) j=1 w(Sj, Sj−1) vol(Sj) + vol(Sj−1)
, where w(S, T ) (cid:44) (cid:80) (u,v)∈E u∈S,v∈T w(u, v) is the cut value from S ⊂ V to T ⊂ V and vol(S) is the sum j=0 forms an optimal partition if this {Sj}k−1 of degrees of the vertices in S. We say that {Sj}k−1 j=0 maximises the ﬂow ratio over all possible partitions. By introducing a complex-valued representation of the graph Laplacian matrix LG, we show that this optimal partition {Sj}k−1 j=0 is well embedded into the bottom eigenspace of LG. To further exploit this novel and intriguing connection, we show that an approximate partition with bounded approximation guarantee can be computed in time nearly-linear in the number of edges of the input graph. In the settings for which the degrees of the vertices are known in advance, we also present a sub-linear time implementation of the algorithm.
The signiﬁcance of our work is further demonstrated by experimental results on several synthetic and real-world datasets. In particular, on the UN Comtrade dataset our clustering results are well supported by the literature from other research ﬁelds. At the technical level, our analysis could be viewed as a hybrid between the proof of the Cheeger inequality [6] and the analysis of spectral clustering for undirected graphs [23], as well as a sequence of recent work on fast constructions of graph sparsiﬁcation (e.g., [26]). We believe our analysis for the new Hermitian Laplacian LG could inspire future research on studying the clusters’ higher-order structure using spectral methods.