Abstract
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) consists of human, object and implicit interac-tion/verb. Different from previous methods that directly map pixels to HOI seman-tics, we propose a novel perspective for HOI learning in an analytical manner. In analogy to Harmonic Analysis, whose goal is to study how to represent the signals with the superposition of basic waves, we propose the HOI Analysis. We argue that coherent HOI can be decomposed into isolated human and object. Meanwhile, iso-lated human and object can also be integrated into coherent HOI again. Moreover, transformations between human-object pairs with the same HOI can also be easier approached with integration and decomposition. As a result, the implicit verb will be represented in the transformation function space. In light of this, we propose an Integration-Decomposition Network (IDN) to implement the above trans-formations and achieve state-of-the-art performance on widely-used HOI detec-tion benchmarks. Code is available at https://github.com/DirtyHarryLYL/
HAKE-Action-Torch/tree/IDN-(Integrating-Decomposing-Network). 1

Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) takes up most of the human activities. As a composition, HOI consists of three parts: <human, verb, object>. To detect HOI, machines need to simultaneously locate human and object and classify the verb [4]. Except for the direct thinking that maps pixels to semantics, in this work we rethink HOI and explore two questions in a novel perspective (Fig. 1):
First, as for the inner structure of HOI, how do isolated human and object compose HOI? Second, what is the relationship between two human-object pairs with the same HOI?
For the ﬁrst question, we may ﬁnd some clues from psychology. The view of Gestalt psychology is usually summarized as one simple sentence: “The whole is more than the sum of its parts” [14]. This is also in line with human perception. Baldassano et al. [1] studied the mechanism of how the brain builds HOI representation and concluded that the encoding of HOI is not the simple sum of human and object: a higher-level neural representation exists. Speciﬁc brain regions, e.g., posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS), are responsible for integrating isolated human and object into coherent
HOI [1]. Hence, to encode HOI, we may need complex nonlinear transformation (integration) to combine isolated human and object. Also, we argue that a reverse process is also essential to decompose HOI into isolated human and object (decomposition). Here we use TI (·) and TD(·) to indicate integration and decomposition functions. According to [1], isolated human and object are different from coherent HOI pair. Therefore, TI (·) should be able to add interactive relationship to isolated elements. On the contrary, TD(·) should eliminate this interactive information. Through the
∗The ﬁrst two authors contribute equally.
†Cewu Lu is the corresponding author, member of Qing Yuan Research Institute and MoE Key Lab of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China and Shanghai Qi Zhi institute. 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
Figure 1: Two questions about HOI. First, we want to explore its inner structure. Second, the relationship between two human-object pairs with same HOI is studied. semantic change before and after transformations, we can reveal the “eigen” structure of HOI carrying the semantics. Considering that verb is hard to represent explicitly in image space, our transformations are conducted in latent space. For the second question, directly transforming one human-object pair to another (inter-pair transformation) is difﬁcult. We need to consider not only isolated element differences but also interaction pattern change. However, with TI (·) and TD(·), things are different.
We can ﬁrst decompose HOI pair-i into isolated person-i and object-i and eliminate the interaction semantics. Next, we transform human-i (object-i) to human-j (object-j) (j (cid:54)= i). The last step is to integrate human-j and object-j into pair-j and add the interaction simultaneously.
Interestingly, we ﬁnd the above process is kind of like Harmonic Analysis: to process the signal, we usually use Fourier Transform (FT) to decompose it into the integration of basic exponential functions; then we can modulate the exponential functions via very simple transformations like scalar-multiplication; ﬁnally, inverse FT can help us integrate the modulated elements and map them back to the input space. This elegant property brings a lot of convenience for signal processing.
Therefore, we mimic this insight and design our methodology, i.e., HOI Analysis. To implement HOI
Analysis, we propose an Integration-Decomposition Network (IDN). In detail, after extracting the features from human/object and human-object tight union boxes, we perform the integration TI (·) to integrate the isolated human and object into the union in latent space. Moreover, decomposition TD(·) is then performed to decompose the union into isolated human and object instances again. Through the transformations, IDN can learn to represent the interaction/verb with TI (·) and TD(·). That said, we ﬁrst embed verbs in transformation function space, then learn to add and eliminate interaction semantics and classify interactions during transformations. For the inter-pair transformation, we adopt a simple instance exchange policy. For each human/object, we beforehand ﬁnd its similar instances as candidates and randomly exchange the original instance with candidates in training.
This policy can avoid complex transformation like motion transfer [3]. Hence, we can focus on the learning of TI (·) and TD(·). Moreover, the lack of samples for rare HOIs can also be alleviated.
To train IDN, we adopt the objectives derived from transformation principles, such as integration validity, decomposition validity and interactiveness validity (detailed in Sec. 3.4). With them,
IDN can effectively model the interaction/verb in transformation function space. Subsequently, IDN can be applied to the HOI detection task by comparing the above validities and greatly advance it.
Our contributions are threefold: (1) Inspired by Harmonic Analysis, we thereon devise HOI Analysis to model the HOI inner structure. (2) A concise Integration-Decomposition Network (IDN) is proposed to conduct the transformations in HOI Analysis. (3) By learning verb representation in transformation function space, IDN achieves state-of-the-art performance on HOI detection. 2