Abstract
Although many fairness criteria have been proposed for decision making, their long-term impact on the well-being of a population remains unclear. In this work, we study the dynamics of population qualiﬁcation and algorithmic decisions under a partially observed Markov decision problem setting. By characterizing the equilibrium of such dynamics, we analyze the long-term impact of static fairness constraints on the equality and improvement of group well-being. Our results show that static fairness constraints can either promote equality or exacerbate disparity depending on the driving factor of qualiﬁcation transitions and the effect of sensitive attributes on feature distributions. We also consider possible interventions that can effectively improve group qualiﬁcation or promote equality of group qualiﬁcation.
Our theoretical results and experiments on static real-world datasets with simulated dynamics show that our framework can be used to facilitate social science studies. 1

Introduction
Automated decision making systems trained with real-world data can have inherent bias and exhibit discrimination against disadvantaged groups. One common approach to alleviating the issue is to impose fairness constraints on the decision such that certain statistical measures (e.g., true positive rate, positive classiﬁcation rate, etc.) across multiple groups are (approximately) equalized. However, their effectiveness has been studied mostly in a static framework, where only the immediate impact of the constraint is assessed but not its long-term consequences. Recent studies have shown that imposing static fairness criteria intended to protect disadvantaged groups can actually lead to pernicious long-term effects [33, 47]. These long-term effects are heavily shaped by the interplay between algorithmic decisions and individuals’ reactions [34]: algorithmic decisions lead to changes in the underlying feature distribution, which then feeds back into the decision making process. Understanding how this type of coupled dynamics evolve is a major challenge [10].
Toward this end, we consider a discrete-time sequential decision process applied to a certain popula-tion, where responses to the decisions made at each time step are manifested in changes in the features of the population in the next time step. Our goal is to understand how (static) fairness criteria in this type of decision making affect the evolution of group well-being and characterize any equilibrium state the system may converge to. In particular, we will focus on myopic policies that maximize the immediate utility under static fairness constraints, and examine their impact on different groups in the long run.
∗Equal contribution 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
More speciﬁcally, we seek to study the dynamics of group qualiﬁcation rates [30, 34, 37, 44] and evaluate the long-term impact of various static fairness constraints imposed on decision making. We examine whether these static fairness constraints mitigate or worsen the qualiﬁcation disparity in the long-run. Our work can be applied to a variety of applications such as recruitment and bank lending. In these applications, an institute observes individuals’ features (e.g., credit scores), and makes myopic decisions (e.g., issue loans) by assessing such features against some variables of interest (e.g., ability to repay) which are unknown and unobservable to the institute when making decisions. Individuals respond to the decisions by investing in effort to either improve or maintain their qualiﬁcation in the next time step. These actions collectively change the qualiﬁcation rate of the population. In summary, our main contributions are: 1. We analyze the equilibrium of qualiﬁcation rates in different groups under a general class of fairness constraints (Section 4). We use a Partially Observed Markov Decision Process (POMDP) framework to model the sequential decision making in different scenarios (Section 3). Using this model, we show that under our formulation optimal policies are of the threshold type and provide a way to compute the threshold. We then prove the existence of an equilibrium (in terms of long-term qualiﬁcation rates) using threshold policies and provide sufﬁcient conditions for a unique equilibrium. 2. We analyze the impact of fairness constraints on the disparity of qualiﬁcation rates when the equilibrium is unique (Section 5). Our ﬁndings suggest that the same fairness constraint can have opposite impacts on the equilibrium depending on the underlying problem scenario. 3. We explore alternative interventions that can be effective in improving qualiﬁcation rates at the equilibrium and promoting equality across different groups (Section 6). 4. We examine our theory on synthetic Gaussian datasets and two real-world scenarios (Section 7).
Our experiments show that our framework can help examine ﬁndings cross domains and support real-life policy making. 2