Abstract
Existing 3D human pose estimation models suffer performance drop when applying to new scenarios with unseen poses due to their limited generalizability. In this work, we propose a novel framework, Inference Stage Optimization (ISO), for improving the generalizability of 3D pose models when source and target data come from different pose distributions. Our main insight is that the target data, even though not labeled, carry valuable priors about their underlying distribution. To ex-ploit such information, the proposed ISO performs geometry-aware self-supervised learning (SSL) on each single target instance and updates the 3D pose model before making prediction. In this way, the model can mine distributional knowledge about the target scenario and quickly adapt to it with enhanced generalization performance. In addition, to handle sequential target data, we propose an online mode for implementing our ISO framework via streaming the SSL, which substan-tially enhances its effectiveness. We systematically analyze why and how our ISO framework works on diverse benchmarks under cross-scenario setup. Remarkably, it yields new state-of-the-art of 83.6% 3D PCK on MPI-INF-3DHP, improving upon the previous best result by 9.7%. 1

Introduction 3D human pose estimation aims to localize 3D human body joints in images or videos. As a fundamental task in computer vision, it is widely applied to human-robot interaction [15], action recognition [53], human tracking [32], etc. This task is commonly resolved in a fully-supervised manner with golden annotations [30, 57, 32, 55] that are collected in well-controlled laboratorial en-vironments [21]. Despite their success in constrained scenarios, these methods are hardly generalized to new scenarios (e.g., in-the-wild scenes), due to severe differences in the underlying distributions (e.g., varying poses, camera viewpoints, body sizes and appearances).
Recent works address such a generalization challenge by leveraging either data augmentation strate-gies such as image composition [32] and synthesis [8, 49], or more complicated model learning strategies like introducing kinematics priors [57, 12], separating 2D and depth features [44, 31, 45, 17] or adopting adversarial learning [54, 14, 51]. However, they are still limited to the cases where training and test samples have similar poses and otherwise tend to suffer large performance drop, since their trained model is commonly biased to the training distribution and hardly generalizes well to an unseen one that is very different.
In this work, we propose a novel scheme named Inference Stage Optimization (ISO). Instead of focusing on improving model training, ISO improves and adapts the model at its inference stage before making predictions (Fig. 1). Our insight is that the target samples, although not labeled, carry valuable information about their distribution, which could be exploited to help adapt the model in the inference stage for correcting unfavorable training bias and improving generalization performance. 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
Figure 1: Illustration on our main idea. We consider cross-scenario setting where the model is trained on the source scenario (e.g., indoor scenes) but applied to a new target scenario (e.g., in-the-wild scenes). Existing methods (upper panel) usually use the trained model for predictions directly, which would suffer performance drop under such cross-scenario setup. Different from them, ISO adapts the model at its inference stage via performing self-supervised learning (SSL) on unlabeled target samples before making predictions (bottom panel), which largely improves its generalizability. Red arrow represents back-propagation based model update. Errors are labeled in black arrows.
However, exploiting such prior from unlabeled data is highly non-trivial. Inspired by recent success of self-supervised learning (SSL) techniques for learning good representations from unlabeled samples in other domains, we propose to leverage SSL to explore the underlying prior from unlabeled target instances. Different from general objects, human poses present clear and informative geometry structure, thus we deploy two different SSL methods, namely random projection adversary [14] and geometric cycle consistency [7], which are simple but effective at learning geometry-aware represen-tations. ISO therefore enables the model to mine both geometric and distributional information from target instances and quickly adapt to the target scenario. As such, the model can estimate 3D poses more reliably across different scenarios, even in presence of severe distribution shifts.
Concretely, when training on labeled source data, instead of only performing fully-supervised learning (FSL) [30, 44, 55], our proposed ISO trains the model with FSL and SSL jointly. Such a training scheme enables the model to leverage geometry-wise feedback from SSL to learn representations and estimate 3D poses. This also facilitates model optimization in the inference stage. During inference,
ISO adapts the model parameters to the new scenario and distribution via performing SSL on each target instance. Equipped with such instance-speciﬁc adaptation, the model can estimate 3D pose for each sample from the new target scenario accurately. In addition, we also develop an online ISO to accumulate the learned adaptation knowledge from a sequence of target samples, which would speed up model adaptation and reduce computational overhead.
We conduct extensive experiments under cross-scenario setup: training a model on Human3.6M [21] and evaluate it on MPI-INF-3DHP [31] and 3DPW [50]. Notably, ISO achieves new state-of-the-art accuracy, 83.6% 3D PCK on MPI-INF-3DHP, improving upon the previous best result by 9.7%.
Our contributions are four-fold. 1) To our best knowledge, we are among the ﬁrst to explore the practi-cal cross-scenario 3D pose estimation task and develop an effective solution (i.e., ISO). Distinguished from existing works, we explore how to effectively adapt the models during the inference stage. 2)
We identify and investigate two simple SSL techniques suitable for 3D pose estimation under the
ISO framework, to exploit geometric and distributional knowledge from unlabeled target data. 3) We develop an online ISO framework, which can handle sequential data effectively and naturally apply to practical scenes where data usually come online sequentially. 4) We provide understandings on why and how ISO works for cross-scenario generalization by conducting systematic analysis, which may inspire future works on improving generalization of human pose estimation. 2