Abstract 3D shape representations that accommodate learning-based 3D reconstruction are an open problem in machine learning and computer graphics. Previous work on neural 3D reconstruction demonstrated beneﬁts, but also limitations, of point cloud, voxel, surface mesh, and implicit function representations. We introduce
Deformable Tetrahedral Meshes (DEFTET) as a particular parameterization that utilizes volumetric tetrahedral meshes for the reconstruction problem. Unlike existing volumetric approaches, DEFTET optimizes for both vertex placement and occupancy, and is differentiable with respect to standard 3D reconstruction loss functions. It is thus simultaneously high-precision, volumetric, and amenable to learning-based neural architectures. We show that it can represent arbitrary, complex topology, is both memory and computationally efﬁcient, and can produce high-ﬁdelity reconstructions with a signiﬁcantly smaller grid size than alternative volumetric approaches. The predicted surfaces are also inherently deﬁned as tetrahedral meshes, thus do not require post-processing. We demonstrate that
DEFTET matches or exceeds both the quality of the previous best approaches and the performance of the fastest ones. Our approach obtains high-quality tetrahedral meshes computed directly from noisy point clouds, and is the ﬁrst to showcase high-quality 3D tet-mesh results using only a single image as input. Our project webpage: https://nv-tlabs.github.io/DefTet/. 1

Introduction
High-quality 3D reconstruction is crucial to many applications in robotics, simulation, and VR/AR.
The input to a reconstruction method may be one or more images, or point clouds from depth-sensing cameras, and is often noisy or imperfectly calibrated. The output is a 3D shape in some format, which must include reasonable reconstruction results even for areas that are unrepresented in the input due to viewpoint or occlusion. Because this problem is naturally ambiguous if not ill-posed, data-driven approaches that utilize deep learning have led to recent advances on solving it, including impressive results for multiview reconstruction [35, 31], single-image reconstruction with 3D [51, 34] and 2D supervision [5, 29, 21], point clouds [41, 26], and generative modeling [1, 52, 25].
The 3D geometric representation used by a neural network strongly inﬂuences the solution space.
Prior representations used with deep learning for 3D reconstruction fall into several categories: points [11, 52], voxels [8, 31], surface meshes [48, 5, 40, 29], and implicit functions (e.g., signed-distance functions) [34, 51]. Each of these representations have certain advantages and disadvantages.
Voxel representations support differing topologies and enable the use of 3D convolutional neural networks (CNNs), one of the most mature 3D neural architectures. However, for high-quality 3D reconstruction, voxels require high-resolution grids that are memory intensive, or hierarchical structures like octtrees [42] that are cumbersome to implement in learning-based approaches because their structure is inherently discontinuous as the tree structure changes with occupancy. 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
Figure 1: DEFTET: Given an input (either a point cloud or an image), DEFTET utilizes a neural network to deform vertices of an initial tetrahedron mesh and to predict the occupancy (green) for each tetrahedron.
Representations based on implicit functions or point clouds have the advantage that they do not impose a predetermined resolution, but they require post-processing steps to obtain a mesh [34, 32, 23, 22]. Furthermore, unlike in mesh representations, surface-based regularizations are non-trivial to incorporate in these approaches as surfaces are implicitly deﬁned [2]. Mesh representations, which directly produce meshed objects, have been shown to produce high quality results [48, 40, 20, 5, 29].
However, they typically require the genus of the mesh to be predeﬁned (e.g., equivalent to a sphere), which limits the types of objects this approach can handle.
Tetrahedral meshes are one of the dominant representations for volumetric solids in graphics [10, 44, 17], and particularly widely used for physics-based simulation [45]. Similar to voxels, they model not only the surface, but the entire interior of a shape using the 3D-simplex of a tetrahedron comprising four triangles as the atom. In this work, we propose utilizing tetrahedral meshes for the reconstruction problem by making them amenable to deep learning. Our representation is a cube fully subdivided into tetrahedrons, where the 3D shape is volumetric and embedded within the tetrahedral mesh. The number of vertices and their adjacency in this mesh is ﬁxed, and proportional to the network’s output size. However, the positions of the vertices and the binary occupancy of each tetrahedron is dynamic.
This allows the mesh to deform to more accurately adapt to object geometry than a corresponding voxel representation. We name this data structure a Deformable Tetrahedral Mesh (DEFTET). Given typical reconstruction loss functions, we show how to propagate gradients back to vertex positions as well as tetrahedron occupancy analytically.
DEFTET offers several advantages over prior work. It can output shapes with arbitrary topology, using the occupancy of the tetrahedrons to differentiate the interior from the exterior of the object. DEFTET can also represent local geometric details by deforming the triangular faces in these tetrahedrons to better align with object surface, thus achieving high ﬁdelity reconstruction at a signiﬁcantly lower memory footprint than existing volumetric approaches. Furthermore, our representation is also computationally efﬁcient as it produces tetrahedral meshes directly, without requiring post-processing during inference. Our approach supports a variety of downstream tasks such as single and multi-view image-based 3D reconstruction with either 3D or 2D supervision. Our result is the ﬁrst to produce tetrahedral meshes directly from noisy point clouds and images, a problem that is notoriously hard in graphics even for surface meshes. We also showcase DEFTET on tetrahedral meshing in the wild, i.e. tetrahedralizing the interior of a given watertight surface, highlighting the advantages of our approach. 2