Abstract
Humans ﬂexibly solve new problems that differ from those previously practiced.
This ability to ﬂexibly generalize is supported by learned concepts that represent useful structure common across different problems. Here we develop a naturalistic drawing task to study how humans rapidly acquire structured prior knowledge.
The task requires drawing visual ﬁgures that share underlying structure, based on a set of composable geometric rules and simple objects. We show that people spontaneously learn abstract drawing procedures that support generalization, and propose a model of how learners can discover these reusable drawing procedures.
Trained in the same setting as humans, and constrained to produce efﬁcient motor actions, this model discovers new drawing program subroutines that generalize to test ﬁgures and resemble learned features of human behavior. These results suggest that two principles guiding motor program induction in the model - abstrac-tion (programs can reﬂect high-level structure that ignores ﬁgure-speciﬁc details) and compositionality (new programs are discovered by recombining previously learned programs) - are key for explaining how humans learn structured internal representations that guide ﬂexible reasoning and learning. 1

Introduction
A long-term goal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) is to build machines that can quickly learn to solve new problems. Inspiration may be gained from studying human intelligence. People readily learn to perform many kinds of tasks without extensive supervision or direct experience, such as inferring what kinds of objects a new word is referring to, or rapidly learning new video games [1]. These abilities are partly supported by learned internal models, or inductive biases, whose structure represents regularities useful for reasoning about new situations (e.g., the hierarchical structure of object categories, or rules common across different video games) [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. In this work we adopt a scientiﬁc, rather than engineering, goal: to probe diagnostic elements of how humans acquire structured prior knowledge, and to understand it in computational terms.
To study such learning in a controlled setting, we introduce a drawing task to investigate rapid, few-shot updating of structured internal models. On its surface, the task is simple: to copy, by drawing on a touchscreen, a series of novel visual ﬁgures. However, how people draw provides rich insight into their internal representations and prior knowledge. This is intuitive when one considers the inherent ambiguity in how even simple line-drawings should be copied. How do different line segments group into coherent objects? How are different objects related? Drawing has therefore been studied for insight into how reasoning and problem-solving is guided by structured prior knowledge, including concepts as diverse as geometry, real-world objects, and geological formations [8, 9, 10, 4, 11, 12, 13]. 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
Figure 1: