Abstract
The goal of this paper is to learn dense 3D shape correspondence for topology-varying objects in an unsupervised manner. Conventional implicit functions esti-mate the occupancy of a 3D point given a shape latent code. Instead, our novel implicit function produces a part embedding vector for each 3D point, which is assumed to be similar to its densely corresponded point in another 3D shape of the same object category. Furthermore, we implement dense correspondence through an inverse function mapping from the part embedding to a corresponded 3D point.
Both functions are jointly learned with several effective loss functions to realize our assumption, together with the encoder generating the shape latent code. During inference, if a user selects an arbitrary point on the source shape, our algorithm can automatically generate a conﬁdence score indicating whether there is a correspon-dence on the target shape, as well as the corresponding semantic point if there is one. Such a mechanism inherently beneﬁts man-made objects with different part constitutions. The effectiveness of our approach is demonstrated through unsuper-vised 3D semantic correspondence and shape segmentation. Code is available at https://github.com/liuf1990/Implicit_Dense_Correspondence. 1

Introduction
Finding dense correspondence between 3D shapes is a key algorithmic component in problems such as statistical modeling [4,5,56], cross-shape texture mapping [28], and space-time 4D reconstruction [35].
Dense 3D shape correspondence can be deﬁned as: given two 3D shapes belonging to the same object category, one can match an arbitrary point on one shape to its semantically equivalent point on another shape if such a correspondence exists. For instance, given two chairs, the dense correspondence of the middle point on one chair’s arm should be the similar middle point on another chair’s arm, despite different shapes of arms; or alternatively, declare the non-existence of correspondence if another chair has no arm. Although prior dense correspondence methods [15,18,29– 31, 37, 42, 48] have proven to be effective on organic shapes, e.g., human bodies and mammals, they become less suitable for generic topology-varying or man-made objects, e.g., chair or vehicles [22].
It remains a challenge to build dense 3D correspondence for a category with large variations in geometry, structure, and even topology. First of all, the lack of annotations on dense correspondence often leaves unsupervised learning the only option. Second, most prior works make an inadequate assumption [50] that there is a similar topological variability between matched shapes. Man-made objects such as chairs shown in Fig. 1 are particularly challenging to tackle, since they often differ not only by geometric deformations, but also by part constitutions. In these cases, existing correspondence methods for man-made objects either perform fuzzy [27, 47] or part-level [2, 44] correspondences, or predict a constant number of semantic points [8, 19]. As a result, they cannot determine whether the established correspondence is a “missing match” or not. As shown in Fig. 1(c), for instance, we may 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 1: Given a set of 3D shapes, our category-speciﬁc unsupervised method learns pair-wise dense correspondence (a) between any source and target shape (red box), and shape segmentation (b). Give an arbitrary point on the source shape (red box), our method predicts its corresponding point on any target shape, and a score measuring the correspondence conﬁdence (c). For each target, we show the conﬁdence scores of red/green points, and score maps around corresponded points. A score less than a threshold (e.g., 0.2) deems the correspondence as “non-existing”– a desirable property for topology-varying shapes with missing parts, e.g., chair’s arm.
ﬁnd non-convincing correspondences in legs between an ofﬁce chair and a 4-legged chair, or even no correspondences in arms for some pairs. Ideally, given a query point on the source shape, a dense correspondence method aims to determine whether there exists a correspondence on the target shape, and the corresponding point if there is. This objective lies at the core of this work.
Shape representation is highly relevant to, and can impact, the approach of dense correspondence.
Recently, compared to point cloud [1, 40, 41] or mesh [14, 16, 51], deep implicit functions have shown to be highly effective as 3D shape representations [3, 9, 10, 32, 33, 38, 43], since it can handle generic shapes of arbitrary topology, which is favorable as a representation for dense correspondence. Often learned as a MLP, conventional implicit functions input the 3D shape represented by a latent code z and a query location x in the 3D space, and estimate its occupancy O = f (x, z). In this work, we propose to plant the dense correspondence capability into the implicit function by learning a semantic part embedding. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst adopt a branched implicit function [9] to learn a part embedding vector (PEV), o = f (x, z), where the max-pooling of o gives the O. In this way, each branch is tasked to learn a representation for one universal part of the input shape, and PEV represents the occupancy of the point w.r.t. all the branches/semantic parts. By assuming that PEVs between a pair of corresponding points are similar, we then establish dense correspondence via an inverse function ˆx = g(o, z) mapping the PEV back to the 3D space. To further satisfy the assumption, we devise an unsupervised learning framework with a joint loss measuring both the occupancy error and shape reconstruction error between x and ˆx. In addition, a cross-reconstruction loss is proposed to enforce part embedding consistency by mapping within a pair of shapes in the collection. During inference, based on the estimated PEVs, we can produce a conﬁdence score to distinguish whether the established correspondence is valid or not. In summary, contributions of this work include: (cid:5) We propose a novel paradigm leveraging implicit functions for category-speciﬁc unsupervised dense 3D shape correspondence, which is suitable for objects with diverse variations including varying topology. (cid:5) We devise several effective loss functions to learn a semantic part embedding, which enables both shape segmentation and dense correspondence. Further, based on the learnt part embedding, our method can estimate a conﬁdence score measuring if the predicted correspondence is valid or not. (cid:5) Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate the superiority of our method in shape segmentation and 3D semantic correspondence. 2