Abstract
We consider a matrix completion problem that exploits social or item similarity graphs as side information. We develop a universal, parameter-free, and computa-tionally efﬁcient algorithm that starts with hierarchical graph clustering and then iteratively reﬁnes estimates both on graph clustering and matrix ratings. Under a hierarchical stochastic block model that well respects practically-relevant social graphs and a low-rank rating matrix model (to be detailed), we demonstrate that our algorithm achieves the information-theoretic limit on the number of observed ma-trix entries (i.e., optimal sample complexity) that is derived by maximum likelihood estimation together with a lower-bound impossibility result. One consequence of this result is that exploiting the hierarchical structure of social graphs yields a substantial gain in sample complexity relative to the one that simply identiﬁes dif-ferent groups without resorting to the relational structure across them. We conduct extensive experiments both on synthetic and real-world datasets to corroborate our theoretical results as well as to demonstrate signiﬁcant performance improvements over other matrix completion algorithms that leverage graph side information. 1

Introduction
Recommender systems have been powerful in a widening array of applications for providing users with relevant items of their potential interest [1]. A prominent well-known technique for operating the systems is low-rank matrix completion [2–18]: Given partially observed entries of an interested matrix, the goal is to predict the values of missing entries. One challenge that arises in the big data era is the so-called cold start problem in which high-quality recommendations are not feasible for new users/items that bear little or no information. One natural and popular way to address the challenge is to exploit other available side information. Motivated by the social homophily theory [19] that users within the same community are more likely to share similar preferences, social networks such as Facebook’s friendship graph have often been employed to improve the quality of recommendation.
While there has been a proliferation of social-graph-assisted recommendation algorithms [1, 20–40], few works were dedicated to developing theoretical insights on the usefulness of side information, and therefore the maximum gain due to side information has been unknown. A few recent efforts have been made from an information-theoretic perspective [41–44]. Ahn et al. [41] have identiﬁed the maximum gain by characterizing the optimal sample complexity of matrix completion in the presence of graph side information under a simple setting in which there are two clusters and users
∗Equal contribution. Corresponding author: Changho Suh. 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
within each cluster share the same ratings over items. A follow-up work [42] extended to an arbitrary number of clusters while maintaining the same-rating-vector assumption per user in each cluster.
While [41, 42] lay out the theoretical foundation for the problem, the assumption of the single rating vector per cluster limits the practicality of the considered model.
In an effort to make a further progress on theoretical insights, and motivated by [45], we consider a more generalized setting in which each cluster exhibits another sub-clustering structure, each sub-cluster (or that we call a “group”) being represented by a different rating vector yet intimately-related to other rating vectors within the same cluster. More speciﬁcally, we focus on a hierarchical graph setting wherein users are categorized into two clusters, each of which comprises three groups in which rating vectors are broadly similar yet distinct subject to a linear subspace of two basis vectors.
Contributions: Our contributions are two folded. First we characterize the information-theoretic sharp threshold on the minimum number of observed matrix entries required for reliable matrix completion, as a function of the quantiﬁed quality (to be detailed) of the considered hierarchical graph side information. The second yet more practically-appealing contribution is to develop a computationally efﬁcient algorithm that achieves the optimal sample complexity for a wide range of scenarios. One implication of this result is that our algorithm fully utilizing the hierarchical graph structure yields a signiﬁcant gain in sample complexity, compared to a simple variant of [41, 42] that does not exploit the relational structure across rating vectors of groups. Technical novelty and algorithmic distinctions also come in the process of exploiting the hierarchical structure; see
Remarks 2 and 3. Our experiments conducted on both synthetic and real-world datasets corroborate our theoretical results as well as demonstrate the efﬁcacy of our proposed algorithm.