Abstract
Geometric Deep Learning has recently made striking progress with the advent of continuous Deep Implicit Fields. They allow for detailed modeling of watertight surfaces of arbitrary topology while not relying on a 3D Euclidean grid, resulting in a learnable parameterization that is not limited in resolution.
Unfortunately, these methods are often not suitable for applications that require an explicit mesh-based surface representation because converting an implicit ﬁeld to such a representation relies on the Marching Cubes algorithm, which cannot be differentiated with respect to the underlying implicit ﬁeld.
In this work, we remove this limitation and introduce a differentiable way to pro-duce explicit surface mesh representations from Deep Signed Distance Functions.
Our key insight is that by reasoning on how implicit ﬁeld perturbations impact local surface geometry, one can ultimately differentiate the 3D location of surface samples with respect to the underlying deep implicit ﬁeld. We exploit this to deﬁne
MeshSDF, an end-to-end differentiable mesh representation which can vary its topology.
We use two different applications to validate our theoretical insight: Single-View
Reconstruction via Differentiable Rendering and Physically-Driven Shape Opti-mization. In both cases our differentiable parameterization gives us an edge over state-of-the-art algorithms. 1

Introduction
Geometric Deep Learning has recently witnessed a breakthrough with the advent of continuous Deep
Implicit Fields [35, 29, 8]. These enable detailed modeling of watertight surfaces, while not relying on a 3D Euclidean grid or meshes with ﬁxed topology, resulting in a learnable surface parameterization that is not limited in resolution.
However, a number of important applications require explicit surface representations, such as tri-angulated meshes or 3D point clouds. Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) simulations and the associated learning-based surrogate methods used for shape design in many engineering ﬁelds [3, 49] are a good example of this where 3D meshes serve as boundary conditions for the Navier-Stokes
Equations. Similarly, many advanced physically-based rendering engines require surface meshes to model the complex interactions of light and physical surfaces efﬁciently [33, 36].
Combining explicit representations with the beneﬁts of deep implicit ﬁelds requires converting the implicit surface parameterization to an explicit representation, which typically relies on one of
∗Equal contribution 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
Image
MeshSDF Raw
Silhouette reﬁnement target silhouette
MeshSDF Reﬁned
MeshSDF Raw
Drag minimization
MeshSDF Reﬁned (a) (b)
Figure 1: MeshSDF. (a) We condition our representation on an input image and output an initial 3D mesh, which we reﬁne via differentiable rasterization [22], thereby exploiting MeshSDF’s end-to-end differentiability. (b) We use our parameterization as a powerful regularizer for aerodynamic optimization tasks. Here, we start from an initial car shape and reﬁne it to minimize pressure drag. the many variants of the Marching Cubes algorithm [28, 32]. However, these approaches are not fully differentiable [24]. This effectively prevents the use of continuous Deep Implicit Fields as parameterizations when operating on explicit surface meshes.
The non-differentiability of Marching Cubes has been addressed by learning differentiable approxi-mations of it [24, 51]. These techniques, however, remain limited to low-resolution meshes [24] or
ﬁxed topologies [51]. An alternative approach has been to reformulate downstream tasks, such as differentiable rendering [19, 26] or surface reconstruction [30], directly in terms of implicit functions, so that explicit surface representations are no longer needed. However, doing so is not easy and may even not be possible for more complex tasks, such as solving CFD optimization problems.
By contrast, we show that it is possible to use continuous signed distance functions to produce explicit surface representations while preserving differentiability. Our key insight is that 3D surface samples can be differentiated with respect to the underlying deep implicit ﬁeld. We prove this formally by reasoning about how implicit ﬁeld perturbations impact 3D surface geometry locally. Speciﬁcally, we derive a closed-form expression for the derivative of a surface sample with respect to the underlying implicit ﬁeld, which is independent of the method used to extract the iso-surface. This enables us to extract the explicit surface using a non-differentiable algorithm, such as Marching Cubes, and then perform our custom backward pass through the extracted surface samples, resulting in an end-to-end differentiable surface parameterization that can describe arbitrary topology and is not limited in resolution. We will refer to our approach as MeshSDF.
We showcase the power and versatility of MeshSDF in the two different applications depicted by
Fig. 1. First, we exploit end-to-end differentiability to reﬁne Single-View Reconstructions through differentiable surface rasterization [22]. Second, we use our parameterization as powerful regularizer in physically-driven shape optimization for CFD purposes [3]. We will demonstrate that in both cases our end-to-end differentiable parameterization gives us an edge over state-of-the art algorithms.
In short, our core contribution is a theoretically well-grounded technique for differentiating through iso-surface extraction. This enables us to harness the full power of deep implicit surface representation to deﬁne an end-to-end differentiable surface mesh parameterization that allows topology changes. 2