Abstract
We propose a heterogeneous meta-learning method that trains a model on tasks with various attribute spaces, such that it can solve unseen tasks whose attribute spaces are different from the training tasks given a few labeled instances. Although many meta-learning methods have been proposed, they assume that all training and target tasks share the same attribute space, and they are inapplicable when attribute sizes are different across tasks. Our model infers latent representations of each attribute and each response from a few labeled instances using an inference network. Then, responses of unlabeled instances are predicted with the inferred representations using a prediction network. The attribute and response representations enable us to make predictions based on the task-speciﬁc properties of attributes and responses even when attribute and response sizes are different across tasks. In our experiments with synthetic datasets and 59 datasets in OpenML, we demonstrate that our proposed method can predict the responses given a few labeled instances in new tasks after being trained with tasks with heterogeneous attribute spaces. 1

Introduction
Humans can learn from their various experiences and use such knowledge for new tasks that are related to but different from their experiences. In contrast, since machine learning methods are usually trained on a speciﬁc task, they can only be used for that task. Therefore, we need to prepare a large amount of training data when we tackle new tasks. However, preparing sufﬁcient training data requires high cost and is time-consuming in real-world applications. For such problems, much attention has been paid to few-shot learning, which is a framework for obtaining models that can learn from fewer examples.
Although many few-shot learning methods have recently been proposed [31, 22, 18, 28, 7, 13, 9], the existing methods assume that all training and target tasks share the same attribute space, and cannot handle tasks with heterogeneous attribute spaces. Here, heterogeneous attribute spaces denote that their attribute spaces are different from each other [38, 20, 37]. This limitation prevents us from learning with a wide variety of tasks, which might contain useful knowledge to cope with new tasks.
Although tasks with heterogeneous attribute spaces have been considered in domain adaptation, or transfer learning [20, 38, 32, 34, 17, 33, 37], these methods assume only two tasks, and require target datasets for training.
In this paper, we propose a few-shot learning method for tasks with heterogeneous attribute spaces.
The proposed method trains a model on tasks with various attribute spaces, such that it can solve unseen tasks whose attribute spaces are different from the training tasks given a few labeled instances.
Figure 1 shows our problem formulation. Our model predicts the response of an attribute vector, which is called a query, given a few instances, which are called a support set, where the number of attributes can be arbitrary, and the target task is different from the training tasks. Our model assumes latent attribute vectors for the representation of each attribute, and latent response vectors for the representation of each response. The latent attribute vectors and latent response vectors are inferred 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
Figure 1: Our problem formulation: In a training phase, our model is trained from various tasks with heterogeneous attribute spaces. In a test phase, the trained model predicts a response of an attribute vector using a few labeled data, where the attribute space of the target task are different from those of the training tasks. from the support set using an inference network. We design the inference network by effectively combining multiple neural networks that accept variable length inputs, so that the latent vectors contain information about their own empirical marginal distribution and relationships between other attributes and responses. A prediction network predicts responses of queries using the latent vectors, by which we can make predictions considering the properties of the attributes and responses that are speciﬁc to each task. The parameters of the neural networks, which are shared across all tasks, are estimated by minimizing the expected test error of the response predictions over tasks with heterogeneous attribute spaces.
The following are the main contributions of this paper: 1) To the best of our knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst attempt at few-shot learning with tasks with heterogeneous attribute spaces. 2) We propose a neural network-based model for obtaining the representations of attributes, responses, and instances from datasets with any number of attributes, responses, and instances. 3) We empirically demonstrate that the proposed method performs well in few-shot learning on tasks with heterogeneous attribute spaces. The proposed method can be used for situations where we have data from multiple tasks that are related to the target task but their attributes are different across tasks. For example, consider anomaly detection for various machines in various factories. Although the attributes are different across machines since they uses different sesing devices, there are related machines. We can detect anomalies for a new machine in a new factory with only a few labeled data by utilizing data of existing machines. 2