Abstract
A central goal of causal inference is to detect and estimate the treatment effects of a given treatment or intervention on an outcome variable of interest, where a member known as the heterogeneous treatment effect (HTE) is of growing popularity in recent practical applications such as the personalized medicine. In this paper, we model the HTE as a smooth nonparametric difference between two less smooth baseline functions, and determine the tight statistical limits of the nonparametric
HTE estimation as a function of the covariate geometry. In particular, a two-stage nearest-neighbor-based estimator throwing away observations with poor matching quality is near minimax optimal. We also establish the tight dependence on the density ratio without the usual assumption that the covariate densities are bounded away from zero, where a key step is to employ a novel maximal inequality which could be of independent interest. 1

Introduction and Main Results
Causal inference aims to draw a causal relationship between some treatment and target responses.
Nowadays, personalized medicine and huge available data make heterogeneous treatment effect (HTE) estimation meaningful and possible. While there are various practical approaches of estimating the
HTE [AI16, PQJ+17, WA18, KSBY19], some important theoretical questions remain unanswered.
In this paper, we consider the Neyman-Rubin potential outcome model [Rub74] for the treatment effect. Assume for simplicity that there are n individuals in the treatment group and the control group, respectively, where the generalizations to different group sizes are straightforward. For each i ∈ Rd and her potential individual i ∈ [n] in the control group, we observe a vector of covariates X 0 i ∈ R for not receiving the treatment. Similarly, for individual i in the treatment group, outcome Y 0 the covariates X 1 i under the treatment are observed. We assume the following model for the potential outcomes: for any i ∈ [n], i and the potential outcome Y 1 i = µ0(X 0
Y 0 i ) + ε0 i , i = µ1(X 1
Y 1 i ) + ε1 i , (1) where µ0, µ1 : Rd → R are the baseline functions for the control and treatment groups, respectively, and ε0 i are modeling errors. The heterogeneous treatment effect τ is deﬁned to be the difference of the baseline functions: i , ε1
τ (x) (cid:44) µ1(x) − µ0(x). (2)
In other words, the treatment effect τ (x) is the expected change in the outcomes after an individual with covariate x receives the treatment, which is usually heterogeneous as τ (x) typically varies in x. The target is to ﬁnd an estimator ˆτ which comes close to the true HTE τ under the L2 norm of functions, based on the control and treatment observations {(X 0 i , Y 0 i )}i∈[n], {(X 1 i )}i∈[n]. i , Y 1 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
In HTE estimation, modeling of the baseline functions µ0, µ1 or the HTE τ plays an important role.
In practice, the treatment effect τ is typically easier to estimate than the baseline functions µ0, µ1, as ideally the treatment effect depends solely on the single treatment. In this paper, we assume that both the baseline and treatment effect functions are nonparametric functions, with an additional constraint that τ is smoother than µ0:
Assumption 1 (Baseline and HTE functions). The baseline µ0 and the treatment effect τ belong to d-dimensional Hölder balls with smoothness parameters βµ ≤ βτ , respectively.
Recall the following deﬁnition of Hölder balls.
Deﬁnition 1 (Hölder ball). The Hölder ball Hd(β) with dimension d and smoothness parameter
β ≥ 0 is the collection of functions f : Rd → R supported on [0, 1]d with (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12)
∂sf 1 · · · ∂xβd d
∂xβ1 (x) −
∂sf 1 · · · ∂xβd d
∂xβ1 (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) (y) (cid:12) (cid:12)
≤ L(cid:107)x − y(cid:107)α 2 for all x, y ∈ Rd and all multi-indices (β1, · · · , βd) ∈ Nd with (cid:80)d i=1 βi = s, where β = s + α with s ∈ N, α ∈ (0, 1]. Throughout we assume that the radius L is a ﬁxed positive constant and omit the dependence on L.
Assumption 1 imposes no structural assumptions on µ0 and τ except for the smoothness, and assumes that the HTE τ is smoother and thus easier to estimate than the baseline µ0. This typically holds as intuitively fewer factors contribute to the HTE than baselines, and semiparametric models usually assume simple forms of HTEs such as constant or linear [Ken16, CCD+18], where Assumption 1 could be treated as a nonparametric counterpart. Standard results in nonparametric estimation reveal that if one naïvely estimates the baselines µ0 and µ1 separately based on (1), then each function can be estimated within accuracy Θ(n−βµ/(2βµ+d)), and so is the difference τ in (2). However, if the covariates in the control and treatment groups match perfectly, i.e. X 0 i for all i ∈ [n], then differencing (1) gives an improved estimation accuracy Θ(n−βτ /(2βτ +d)) for the HTE τ . In general, the estimation performance of HTE is an interpolation between the above extremes and depends heavily on the quality of the covariate matching. To model such qualities, we have the following assumption on the covariates X 0
Assumption 2 (Covariates). The covariates are generated under ﬁxed or random designs below: i = X 1 i , X 1 i .
• Fixed design: the covariates are generated from the following ﬁxed grid (cid:8)X 0 i (cid:9) i∈[n] = (cid:26) 0, 1 m
, · · · , (cid:27)d
, m − 1 m (cid:8)X 1 i (cid:9) i∈[n] = (cid:26) 0, 1 m
, · · · , (cid:27)d m − 1 m
+ ∆, for some vector ∆ ∈ Rd with (cid:107)∆(cid:107)∞ ≤ 1/(2m), and m (cid:44) n1/d is assumed to be an integer.
• Random design: the covariates are i.i.d. sampled from unknown densities g0, g1 on [0, 1]d:
X 0 1 , X 0 2 , · · · , X 0 n i.i.d.∼ g0, X 1 1 , X 1 2 , · · · , X 1 n i.i.d.∼ g1, where there is a bounded likelihood ratio κ−1 ≤ g0(x)/g1(x) ≤ κ on the densities.
Under the ﬁxed design, the covariates in both groups are evenly spaced grids in [0, 1]d, with a shift ∆ quantifying the matching distance between the control and treatment groups. The ﬁxed design is not very practical, but the analysis will provide important insights for the HTE estimation. The random design model is more meaningful and realistic without any matching parameter, and the density ratio g0/(g0 + g1) corresponds to the propensity score, a key quantity in causal inference. We assume that κ−1 ≤ g0/g1 ≤ κ everywhere, as it is usually necessary to have a propensity score bounded away from 0 and 1. Besides the bounded likelihood ratio, we remark that it is not assumed that the densities g0, g1 are bounded away from zero.
Finally it remains to model the noises ε0 i , ε1 i are mutually independent, zero-mean and of variance σ2. i , ε1
Assumption 3 (Noise). The noises ε0 i , and we assume the following mild conditions. 2
Based on the above assumptions, the target of this paper is to characterize the minimax risks of the nonparametric HTE estimation under both ﬁxed and random designs. Speciﬁcally, we are interested in the following minimax L1 risk
Rﬁxed n,d,βµ,βτ ,σ(∆) (cid:44) inf
ˆτ sup
µ0∈Hd(βµ),τ ∈Hd(βτ )
Eµ0,τ [(cid:107)ˆτ − τ (cid:107)1] for ﬁxed design with matching parameter ∆ ∈ Rd, where the inﬁmum is taken over all possible estimators ˆτ based on the observations {(X 0 i )}i∈[n]. As for the minimax risk for random designs, we include the dependence on the density ratio κ and use the L1 norm based on the density g0 (as we do not assume that the densities are bounded away from zero):
Eµ0,τ [(cid:107)ˆτ − τ (cid:107)L1(g0)]. n,d,βµ,βτ ,σ(κ) (cid:44) inf i )}i∈[n], {(X 1
Rrandom i , Y 1 i , Y 0 sup
µ0∈Hd(βµ),τ ∈Hd(βτ ),g0,g1
ˆτ
The main aim of this paper is to characterize the tight minimax rates for the above quantities, and in particular, how they are determined by the covariate geometry and the full set of parameters (n, κ, σ) of interest. In addition, we aim to extract useful practical insights (instead of fully practical algorithms) based on the minimax optimal estimation procedures established in theory. Moreover, we mostly focus on the special nature of the HTE estimation problem instead of general nonparametric estimation, and therefore we elaborate less on broad issues of nonparametric statistics such as adaptation/hyperparameter estimation and refer interested readers to known literature (see Section 5).
Our ﬁrst result is the characterization of the minimax rate for HTE estimation under ﬁxed designs.
Theorem 1 (Fixed Design). Under Assumptions 1–3,
Rﬁxed n,d,βµ,βτ ,σ(∆) (cid:16) n−
βµ d (n 1 d (cid:107)∆(cid:107)∞)βµ∧1 + (cid:19) βτ 2βτ +d
. (cid:18) σ2 n
Theorem 1 shows that, as the covariate matching quality improves (i.e. (cid:107)∆(cid:107)∞ shrinks), the esti-mation error of the HTE decreases from n−βµ/d, which is slightly better than the estimation error n−βµ/(2βµ+d) for the baselines, to the optimal estimation error (σ2/n)βτ /(2βτ +d) when the learner has n direct samples from τ . We also remark that the covariate matching quality is determined by the (cid:96)∞ norm of ∆, and the matching bias does not depend on the noise level σ.
The minimax rate for HTE estimation under random designs exhibits more interesting behaviors.
Theorem 2 (Random Design). Under Assumptions 1–3, if βτ ≤ 1 and κ ≤ n, then
Rrandom n,d,βµ,βτ ,σ(κ) = (cid:101)Θ

 (cid:17) 1
−1
µ +β d(β
−1
τ ) + (cid:19) 2+d(β 1
−1
µ +β
−1
τ ) (cid:18) κσ2 n2
+ (cid:18) κσ2 n (cid:19) βτ 2βτ +d

 . (cid:16) κ n2
Theorem 2 provides the ﬁrst minimax analysis of the HTE estimation with tight dependence on all parameters (n, κ, σ) without assuming densities bounded away from zero. Interestingly, Theorem 2 shows that there are three regimes of the minimax rate of the HTE estimation under random designs, and in particular, there is an intermediate regime where neither the matching bias nor the estimation of τ dominates. Moreover, when it comes to the dependence on the density ratio κ, the effective sample size is n/
κ in the ﬁrst two regimes, while it becomes n/κ in the last regime.
√ 1.1