Abstract
Telehealth and remote health monitoring have become increasingly important dur-ing the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic and it is widely expected that this will have a lasting impact on healthcare practices. These tools can help reduce the risk of exposing patients and medical staff to infection, make healthcare services more accessible, and allow providers to see more patients. However, objective measurement of vital signs is challenging without direct contact with a patient. We present a video-based and on-device optical cardiopulmonary vital sign measurement approach.
It leverages a novel multi-task temporal shift convolutional attention network (MTTS-CAN) and enables real-time cardiovascular and respiratory measurements on mobile platforms. We evaluate our system on an Advanced RISC Machine (ARM) CPU and achieve state-of-the-art accuracy while running at over 150 frames per second which enables real-time applications. Systematic experimentation on large benchmark datasets reveals that our approach leads to substantial (20%-50%) reductions in error and generalizes well across datasets. 1

Introduction
The SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) pandemic is transforming the face of healthcare around the world
[1, 2]. One example of this is the sharp increase (by more than 10x) in the number of medical appointments held via telehealth platforms because of the increased pressures on healthcare systems, the desire to protect healthcare workers and restrictions on travel [2]. Telehealth includes the use of telecommunication tools, such as phone calls and messaging, and online health portals that allow patients to communicate with their providers. The Center for Disease Control and Prevention is recommending the “use of telehealth strategies when feasible to provide high-quality patient care and reduce the risk of COVID-19 transmission in healthcare settings”1. Performing primary care visits from a patient’s home reduces the risk of exposing people to infections, increases the efﬁciency of visits and facilitates care for people in remote locations or who are unable to travel. These are longstanding arguments for telehealth and will still be valid after the end of the current pandemic.
Healthcare systems are likely to maintain a high number of telehealth appointments in the future [3].
However, despite the longstanding promise of telehealth, it is difﬁcult to provide a similar level of care on a video call as during an in-person visit. The physician can diagnose a patient based on visual observations and self-reported symptoms; however, in most cases they cannot objectively assess the patient’s physiological state. This means that physicians have to make decisions (e.g., recommending a trip to the emergency department) without important data. In the case of COVID-19, there are severe cardiopulmonary (heart and lung related) symptoms that are difﬁcult to evaluate remotely. The
Github Link: https://github.com/xin71/MTTS-CAN 1https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/ways-operate-effectively.html 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
symptoms seen in patients have drawn links to acute respiratory distress syndrome [4], myocardial injury, and chronic damage to the cardiovascular system. Experts suggest that particular attention should be given to cardiovascular protection during treatment [5]. The development of more accurate and efﬁcient non-contact cardiopulmonary measurement technology would give remote physicians access to the data to make more informed decisions. Beyond telehealth, the same technology could impact passive health monitoring, improving the standard of care for infants in neonatal intensive care units [6].
Cameras can be used to measure physiological signals, including heart and respiration rates, and blood oxygenation levels [7, 8, 9], based on facial videos [10, 11]. Non-contact cardiopulmonary measurement involves capturing subtle changes in light reﬂected from the body caused by physiologi-cal processes. Imaging methods can be used to measure volumetric changes of blood in the surface of the skin cause changes in light absorption (↑ volume of hemoglobin = ↑ light absorption). This in turns affects the amount of visible light reﬂected from the skin, which is the source of the photo-plethysmogram (PPG). The mechanical force of blood pumping around the body also causes subtle motions and these are the source of the ballistocardiogram (BCG). These color and motion changes in the video help us extract the pulse signal and heart rate frequency. The PPG and BCG signals provide complementary information to one another and also contain information about breathing due to respiratory sinus arrhythmia [12]. Respiratory signals can also be recovered from motion-based analyses of the head and torso as the subjects breathes in and out [13].
Computer vision for remote cardiopulmonary measurement is a growing ﬁeld; however, there is room for improvement in the existing methods. First, accuracy of measurements is critical to avoid false alarms or misdiagnoses. The US Federal Drug Administration (FDA) mandates that testing of a new device for cardiac monitoring should show “substantial equivalence” in accuracy with a legal predicate device (e.g., a contact sensor)2. This standard has not been obtained in non-contact approaches. Second, designing models that run on-device helps reduce the need for high-bandwidth
Internet connections making telehealth more practical and accessible. Moreover, camera-based cardiopulmonary measurement is a highly privacy sensitive application. These data are personally identiﬁable, combining videos of a patient’s face with sensitive physiological signals. Therefore, streaming and uploading data to the cloud to perform analysis is not ideal. Finally, the ability to run at a high frame rates enables opportunistic sensing (e.g., obtaining measurements each time you look at your phone) and helps capture waveform dynamics that could be used to detect arterial ﬁbrillation
[14], hypertension [15], and heart rate variability [16] where high-frame rates (at least 100Hz) are a requirement to yield precise measurements.
We propose a novel multi-task temporal shift convolutional attention network (MTTS-CAN) to address the challenges of privacy, portability, and precision in contactless cardiopulmonary measurement.
Our end-to-end MTTS-CAN leverages temporal shift modules to perform efﬁcient temporal modeling and remove various sources of noise without any additional computational overhead. An attention module improves signal source separation, and a multi-task mechanism shares the intermediate representations between pulse and respiration to jointly estimate both simultaneously. By combining these three techniques, our proposed network can run on an ARM CPU and achieve the state-of-the-art accuracy and inference speed.
To summarize, the contributions of this paper are to 1) present an accurate and efﬁcient approach to perform on-device real-time spatial-temporal modeling of vitals signal, 2) evaluate our system and show state-of-the-art performance on two large public datasets, 3) provide an implementation of core tensor operations required for MTTS-CAN using a modern deep learning compiler and an on-device latency evaluation across different architectures showing MTTS-CAN can run at more than 150 frame per second. Our code, models, and video ﬁgures are provided in the supplementary materials. 2