Abstract
Safety in terms of collision avoidance for multi-robot systems is a difﬁcult challenge under uncertainty, non-determinism and lack of complete information. This paper aims to propose a collision avoidance method that accounts for both measurement uncertainty and motion uncertainty. In particular, we propose Probabilistic Safety
Barrier Certiﬁcates (PrSBC) using Control Barrier Functions to deﬁne the space of admissible control actions that are probabilistically safe with formally provable theoretical guarantee. By formulating the chance constrained safety set into deter-ministic control constraints with PrSBC, the method entails minimally modifying an existing controller to determine an alternative safe controller via quadratic pro-gramming constrained to PrSBC constraints. The key advantage of the approach is that no assumptions about the form of uncertainty are required other than ﬁnite support, also enabling worst-case guarantees. We demonstrate effectiveness of the approach through experiments on realistic simulation environments. 1

Introduction
Safe control is one of the most important task that needs to be addressed in the realm of large-scale multi-robot systems. For example, consider the problem of building an automatic collision avoidance system (ACAS) for aerial robots that would scale up as the autonomous aerial trafﬁc increases. Such a system needs to be computationally efﬁcient for execution in real-time and robust to various real-world factors that include uncertainty, non-determinism and approximations made in the formulation of the system. Measurement uncertainty in the system arises from various estimation or prediction procedures in real-world that rely on sensory information ( e.g. LIDARS, on-board GPS) being collected in real-time to get robots state information. On the other hand, non-determinism often arises from our in-ability to model various exogenous variables that are part of our operating environment, e.g. phenomena such as wind gusts. Ability to pro-actively deal with such measurement and motion uncertainty is fundamental in the safety considerations.
In this work, we consider the problem of real-time safe control in terms of reactive collision avoidance for crowded multi-robot team operating in a realistic environment with their existing task-related controllers or control policies. Akin to real-world we consider scenarios with both measurement
∗Work done while interning at Microsoft Corporation, Redmond.
Code is available online at https://github.com/wenhaol/PrSBC. 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
uncertainty (e.g. noisy sensing and localization) and motion uncertainty (e.g. disturbances from envi-ronments and inaccurately modelled dynamics). Many safe control methods that attempt to address the measurement uncertainty often make restrictive assumptions, such as Gaussian representation of the uncertainties [9, 19, 26, 34, 35]. Approaches that consider bounded localization or control disturbance using conservative bounding volumes [8, 10, 13, 17] often overestimate the probability of collisions.
This paper proposes a novel approach that provides chance-constrained collision-free guarantees for multi-robot system under measurement and motion uncertainty. At the heart of the method is the idea of probabilistic safety barrier certiﬁcates (PrSBC) that enforces the chance constrained collision avoidance with deterministic constraints over an existing controller. With PrSBC constraints, the safety controller can be achieved by minimally modifying the existing controllers in real-time as done by other control barrier function approaches [4, 28]. This hence formally satisﬁes the collision-avoidance chance-constraints while staying as close to the original robot behaviors as possible. Our work is most closely related to the work on safety barrier certiﬁcates (SBC) for multi-robot collision avoidance [28] using permissive control barrier functions (CBF) [3, 4]. While the prior work focused on deterministic settings, our goal here is to provide a safety envelope around an existing controller that accounts for uncertainties and non-determinism in a probabilistic setting. There are several advantages of the proposed PrSBC. First, in contrast of other probabilistic collision avoidance approaches that directly constrain the inter-robot distance [30, 34, 35], the proposed method produces a more permissive set for the controllers with a tighter bound. Second, the PrSBC naturally inherits the forward invariance from CBF, e.g. robots staying in the collision-free set at all time, and thus enabling us to prove guarantees throughout the continuous time scale. Finally, it is natural to apply the chance constrained collision avoidance with PrSBC under both centralized and decentralized settings to bridge learning based methodologies and model based safety-critical control with provable safety guarantee. For example, one may use learning techniques such as Gaussian Processes to learn one or more partially unknown dynamical systems with noisy uncertainties and use our PrSBC approach to compute certiﬁed probablistically safe policies to collect more data for further improving models. We believe integrating dynamical system learning with our PrSBC framework to guarantee safe learning to control is an important future direction.
The key underlying assumption in our method is that the uncertainties arising due to sensor measure-ments, incomplete dynamics and other exogenous variables have ﬁnite support. This is a reasonable assumption for many of the multi-robot scenarios. For example, we can safely assume that true positions of robots, or the amount of wind gusts etc. are bounded within certain sensor speciﬁca-tions or physical parameters respectively (e.g. [11]). We use the task similar to automatic collision avoidance system for aerial robots as a motivating application. Our experiments explore the proposed computation of PrSBC controller in both centralized and decentralized settings, which can handle both the uncertainties as well as environmental disturbances while continuously guaranteeing safety.
In summary, the core contributions of this paper are as follows: 1. A novel chance-constrained collision avoidance method with Probabilistic Safety Barrier
Certiﬁcates (PrSBC) ensuring provable forward invariance under uncertainties with bounded support. 2. Formal proof of existence of PrSBC in a closed form. 3. Experimental results on the task similar to automatic collision avoidance for aerial robots that demonstrate efﬁciency, scalability and distributed computation. 2