Abstract
Trajectory prediction for scenes with multiple agents and entities is a challenging problem in numerous domains such as trafﬁc prediction, pedestrian tracking and path planning. We present a general architecture to address this challenge which models the crucial inductive biases of motion, namely, inertia, relative motion, intents and interactions. Speciﬁcally, we propose a relational model to ﬂexibly model interactions between agents in diverse environments. Since it is well-known that human decision making is fuzzy by nature, at the core of our model lies a novel attention mechanism which models interactions by making continuous-valued (fuzzy) decisions and learning the corresponding responses. Our architecture demonstrates signiﬁcant performance gains over existing state-of-the-art predictive models in diverse domains such as human crowd trajectories, US freeway trafﬁc,
NBA sports data and physics datasets. We also present ablations and augmentations to understand the decision-making process and the source of gains in our model. 1

Introduction
Multi-agent settings are ubiquitous and predicting trajectories of agents in motion is a key challenge in many domains, e.g., trafﬁc prediction [28, 15], pedestrian tracking [1, 3] and path planning [20]. In order to model multi-agent settings with complex underlying interactions, several recent works based on graphs and graph neural networks have achieved signiﬁcant success in prediction performance [23, 14]. However, modeling interactions between two agents is challenging because it is not a binary true/false variable but is rather fuzzy1 by nature. For instance, a person driving a car on a freeway 1We use the word fuzzy in this work to represent continuous-valued decisions over their discrete-valued boolean counterparts and not necessarily to fuzzy logic. 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
might reason along these lines: “The car in front of me is slowing down so I should also step on the brake lightly to avoid tailing the car closely”, wherein the decisions slowing down, braking lightly and tailing closely are all continuous-valued in nature. Since such fuzzy representations enter routinely into human interactions and decision making, we posit that learning to predict trajectories of interacting agents can beneﬁt from fuzzy (continuous-valued) decision making capabilities.
Motivated by this observation, we present a novel Fuzzy Query Attention (FQA) mechanism to solve the aforementioned challenges. FQA models pairwise attention to decide about when two agents are interacting by learning keys and queries which are combined with a dot-product structure to make continuous-valued (fuzzy) decisions. It also simultaneously learns how the agent under focus is affected by the inﬂuencing agent given the fuzzy decisions. We demonstrate signiﬁcant performance gains over existing state-of-the-art predictive models in several domains: (a) trajectories of human crowd, (b) US freeway trafﬁc, (c) object motion and collisions governed by Newtonian mechanics, (d) motion of charged particles under electrostatic ﬁelds, and (e) basketball player trajectories, thereby showing that FQA can learn to model very diverse kinds of interactions. Our experiments show that the fuzzy decisions made over time are highly predictive of interactions even when all other input features are ignored. Our architecture also supports adding human knowledge in the form of fuzzy decisions, which can provide further gains in prediction performance. 2