Abstract
Navigation tasks in photorealistic 3D environments are challenging because they require perception and effective planning under partial observability. Recent work shows that map-like memory is useful for long-horizon navigation tasks.
However, a focused investigation of the impact of maps on navigation tasks of varying complexity has not yet been performed. We propose the multiON task, which requires navigation to an episode-speciﬁc sequence of objects in a realistic environment. MultiON generalizes the ObjectGoal navigation task [2, 52] and explicitly tests the ability of navigation agents to locate previously observed goal objects. We perform a set of multiON experiments to examine how a variety of agent models perform across a spectrum of navigation task complexities. Our experiments show that: i) navigation performance degrades dramatically with escalating task complexity; ii) a simple semantic map agent performs surprisingly well relative to more complex neural image feature map agents; and iii) even oracle map agents achieve relatively low performance, indicating the potential for future work in training embodied navigation agents using maps. 1

Introduction
Recent work on embodied AI agents has made tremendous progress on tasks such as visual naviga-tion [25, 39, 52], embodied question answering [20, 44], and natural language instruction follow-ing [3]. This progress has been enabled by the availability of realistic 3D environments and software platforms that simulate navigation tasks within such data [32, 38, 39, 47]. Large-scale training has led to near-perfect agent performance for basic visual navigation tasks under certain assumptions [45].
At the same time, memory has emerged as a key bottleneck for further progress in longer-horizon tasks. Embodied navigation agents are surprisingly brittle, with complete failure being common when the path to be navigated and number of locations to be visited is modestly increased [3, 39, 45]. In response, much prior work has incorporated some form of map-like memory to aid performance in longer-horizon tasks [8, 15, 22, 25–27, 35, 37, 51]. This prior work has mostly focused on proposing approaches for constructing the maps from partial observations of the environment, and architectures for leveraging the map representation. Though map-like memory structures need not be optimal for learning-based agents, they bring the advantage of a widely-used spatial abstraction and human interpretability. They also impose inductive bias tied to the structure of interiors that have been shown to outperform implicit memory architectures in a variety of navigation tasks [7, 13–15].
We focus on studying what information is useful in maps, under perfect agent localization and map aggregation. This is in contrast with prior work which focuses on how to aggregate information under
∗denotes equal contribution 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
imperfect localization [15, 27]. Perfect localization is a simplifying assumption that decouples the question of what is useful in a map representation from dealing with noisy sensing and actuation.
We propose multiON, a task framework that involves navigation to an ordered sequence of objects placed within realistic 3D interiors. This task framework generalizes earlier visual navigation tasks such as the PointGoal and ObjectGoal tasks [2], by deﬁning an arbitrary sequence of semantically distinct objects as navigation goals. Using a set of multiON experiments, we benchmark agents with egocentric mapping, agents using oracle maps, and agents possessing no map memory.
The multiON framework allows for direct control of task difﬁculty by generating navigation episodes with multiple goal objects. At the same time, the base navigation task is simple, allowing us to focus our investigation on map utilization in visual navigation. Though there is much prior work involving higher-level understanding, planning and reasoning (e.g., natural language understanding [3, 12, 28], embodied question answering [20, 50], interaction with the environment [41], leveraging world priors [49]) we avoid introducing these elements to limit confounding factors that inﬂuence the impact of map memory on visual navigation. In summary, we make the following contributions:
• Propose the multiON task framework to allow for controlled, systematic investigation of visual navigation in 3D environments.
• Benchmark the impact of egocentrically-constructed map representations and oracle maps on navigation performance across a breadth of navigation task complexities.
• Show that agent navigation performance drops dramatically with task complexity, that a simple semantic map construction approach outperforms a more complex neural image feature map agent, and that even oracle map agents achieve relatively low performance, indicating the potential for future work in this direction. 2