Abstract
Sortition is a political system in which decisions are made by panels of randomly selected citizens. The process for selecting a sortition panel is traditionally thought of as uniform sampling without replacement, which has strong fairness properties.
In practice, however, sampling without replacement is not possible since only a fraction of agents is willing to participate in a panel when invited, and different demographic groups participate at different rates. In order to still produce panels whose composition resembles that of the population, we develop a sampling algorithm that restores close-to-equal representation probabilities for all agents while satisfying meaningful demographic quotas. As part of its input, our algorithm requires probabilities indicating how likely each volunteer in the pool was to participate. Since these participation probabilities are not directly observable, we show how to learn them, and demonstrate our approach using data on a real sortition panel combined with information on the general population in the form of publicly available survey data. 1

Introduction
What if political decisions were made not by elected politicians but by a randomly selected panel of citizens? This is the core idea behind sortition, a political system originating in the Athenian democracy of the 5th century BC [24]. A sortition panel is a randomly selected set of individuals who are appointed to make a decision on behalf of population from which they were drawn. Ideally, sortition panels are selected via uniform sampling without replacement — that is, if a panel of size k is selected from a population of size n, then each member of the population has a k/n probability of being selected. This system offers appealing fairness properties for both individuals and subgroups of the population: First, each individual knows that she has the same probability of being selected as anyone else, which assures her an equal say in decision making. The resulting panel is also, in expectation, proportionally representative to all groups in the population: if a group comprises x% of the population, they will in expectation comprise x% of the panel as well. In fact, if k is large enough, concentration of measure makes it likely that even a group’s ex post share of the panel will be close to x%. Both properties stand in contrast to the status quo of electoral democracy, in which the equal inﬂuence of individuals and the fair participation of minority groups are often questioned.
Due to the evident fairness properties of selecting decision makers randomly, sortition has seen a recent surge in popularity around the world. Over the past year, we have spoken with several nonproﬁt organizations whose role it is to sample and facilitate sortition panels [8]. One of these nonproﬁts, the 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
Sortition Foundation, has organized more than 20 panels in about the past year.1 Recent high-proﬁle examples of sortition include the Irish Citizens’ Assembly,2 which led to Ireland’s legalization of abortion in 2018, and the founding of the ﬁrst permanent sortition chamber of government,3 which occurred in a regional parliament in the German-speaking community of Belgium in 2019.
The fairness properties of sortition are often presented as we have described them — in the setting where panels are selected from the whole population via uniform sampling without replacement. As we have learned from practitioners, however, this sampling approach is not applicable in practice due to limited participation: typically, only between 2 and 5% of citizens are willing to participate in the panel when contacted. Moreover, those who do participate exhibit self-selection bias, i.e., they are not representative of the population, but rather skew toward certain groups with certain features.
To address these issues, sortition practitioners introduce additional steps into the sampling process.
Initially, they send a large number of invitation letters to a random subset of the population. If a recipient is willing to participate in a panel, they can opt into a pool of volunteers. Ultimately, the panel of size k is sampled from the pool. Naturally, the pool is unlikely to be representative of the population, which means that uniformly sampling from the pool would yield panels whose demo-graphic composition is unrepresentative of that of the population. To prevent grossly unrepresentative panels, many practitioners impose quotas on groups based on orthogonal demographic features such as gender, age, or residence inside the country. These quotas ensure that the ex-post number of panel members belonging to such a group lies within a narrow interval around the proportional share. Since it is hard to construct panels satisfying a set of quotas, practitioners typically sample using greedy heuristics. One downside of these greedy algorithms is that they may need many attempts to ﬁnd a valid panel, and thus might take exponential time to produce a valid panel if one exists. More importantly, however, even though these heuristics tend to eventually ﬁnd valid panels, the probability with which each individual is selected via their selection process is not controlled in a principled way.
By not deliberately controlling individual selection probabilities, existing panel selection procedures fail to achieve basic fairness guarantees to individuals. Where uniform sampling in the absence of self-selection bias selects each person with equal probability k/n, currently-used greedy algorithms do not even guarantee a minimum selection probability for members of the pool, let alone fairly distributed probabilities over members of the population. The absence of such a theoretical guarantee has real ramiﬁcations in practice: as we show in Section 5, in the real-world instance we study, the greedy algorithm selects several population members with probability less than half the magnitude of k/n.
This unfairness to individuals, while problematic in its own right, can also lead to unfairness for groups. In particular, current algorithms use quotas to enforce representation of a set of pre-chosen groups delineated by single features, but these quotas do not protect groups deﬁned by intersections of these features: for example, proportional representation of women and of young people does not guarantee the proportional representation of young women. By giving some individuals very low probability of selection on the basis of their combinations of features, existing algorithms may systematically allocate very low probability to all members of a certain intersectional group, preventing their perspectives from being fairly represented on the panel. 1.1 Our Techniques and Results
The main contribution of this paper is a more principled sampling algorithm that, even in the presence of limited participation and self-selection bias, retains the individual fairness properties of uniform sampling in the absence of these challenges, while also allowing the deterministic satisfaction of quotas. In particular, our algorithm satisﬁes the following desiderata: – End-to-End Fairness: The algorithm selects the panel via a process such that all members of the population appear on the panel with probability asymptotically close to k/n. This also implies that all groups in the population, including those deﬁned by intersections of arbitrarily many features, will be near-proportionally represented in expectation. – Deterministic Quota Satisfaction: The selected panel satisﬁes certain upper and lower quotas enforcing approximate representation for a set of speciﬁed features. 1https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hz2d_8eBEKg at 8:53. 2https://2016-2018.citizensassembly.ie/en/ 3https://www.politico.eu/article/belgium-democratic-experiment-citizens-assembly/ 2
– Computational Efﬁciency: The algorithm returns a valid panel (or fails) in polynomial time.
End-to-end fairness refers to the fact that our algorithm is fair to individuals with respect to their probabilities of going from population to panel, across the intermediate steps of being invited, opting into the pool, and being selected for the panel. End-to-end fairness can be seen primarily as a guarantee of individual fairness, while proportional representation of all groups in expectation, along with deterministic quota satisfaction, can be seen as two different guarantees of group fairness.
The key challenge in satisfying these desiderata is self-selection bias, which can result in the pool being totally unrepresentative of the population. In the worst case, the pool can be so skewed that it contains no representative panel — in fact, the pool might not even contain k members. As a result, no algorithm can produce a valid panel from every possible pool. However, we are able to give an algorithm that succeeds with high probability, under weak assumptions mainly relating the number of invitation letters sent out to k and the minimum participation probability over all agents.
Crucially, any sampling algorithm that gives (near-)equal selection probability to all members of the population must reverse the self-selection bias occurring in the formation of the pool. We formalize this self-selection bias by assuming that each agent i in the population agrees to join the pool with some positive participation probability qi when invited. If these qi values are known for all members of the pool, our sampling algorithm can use them to neutralize self-selection bias. To do so, our algorithm selects agent i for the panel with a probability (close to) proportional to 1/qi, conditioned on i being in the pool. This compensates for agents’ differing likelihoods of entering the pool, thereby giving all agents an equal end-to-end probability. On a given pool, the algorithm assigns marginal selection probabilities to every agent in the pool. Then, to ﬁnd a distribution over valid panels that implements these marginals, the algorithm randomly rounds a linear program using techniques based on discrepancy theory. Since our approach aims for a fair distribution of valid panels rather than just a single panel, we can give probabilistic fairness guarantees.
As we mentioned, our theoretical and algorithmic results, presented in Section 3, take the probabilities qi of all pool members i as given in the input. While these values are not observed in practice, we show in Section 4 that they can be estimated from available data. We cannot directly train a classiﬁer predicting participation, however, because practitioners collect data only on those who do join the pool, yielding only positively labeled data. In place of a negatively labeled control group, we use publicly available survey data, which is unlabeled (i.e., includes no information on whether its members would have joined the pool). To learn in this more challenging setting, we use techniques from contaminated controls, which combine the pool data with the unlabeled sample of the population to learn a predictive model for agents’ participation probabilities. In Section 5, we use data from a real-world sortition panel to show that plausible participation probabilities can be learned and that the algorithm produces panels that are close to proportional across features. For a synthetic population produced by extrapolating the real data, we show that our algorithm obtains fair end-to-end probabilities. 1.2