Abstract
We propose the ﬁrst general and practical framework to design certiﬁable algo-rithms for robust geometric perception in the presence of a large amount of outliers.
We investigate the use of a truncated least squares (TLS) cost function, which is known to be robust to outliers, but leads to hard, nonconvex, and nonsmooth optimization problems. Our ﬁrst contribution is to show that –for a broad class of geometric perception problems– TLS estimation can be reformulated as an opti-mization over the ring of polynomials and Lasserre’s hierarchy of convex moment relaxations is empirically tight at the minimum relaxation order (i.e., certiﬁably ob-tains the global minimum of the nonconvex TLS problem). Our second contribution is to exploit the structural sparsity of the objective and constraint polynomials and leverage basis reduction to signiﬁcantly reduce the size of the semideﬁnite program (SDP) resulting from the moment relaxation, without compromising its tightness.
Our third contribution is to develop scalable dual optimality certiﬁers from the lens of sums-of-squares (SOS) relaxation, that can compute the suboptimality gap and possibly certify global optimality of any candidate solution (e.g., returned by fast heuristics such as RANSAC or graduated non-convexity). Our dual certiﬁers leverage Douglas-Rachford Splitting to solve a convex feasibility SDP. Numerical experiments across different perception problems, including single rotation aver-aging, shape alignment, 3D point cloud and mesh registration, and high-integrity satellite pose estimation, demonstrate the tightness of our relaxations, the correct-ness of the certiﬁcation, and the scalability of the proposed dual certiﬁers to large problems, beyond the reach of current SDP solvers.1 1

Introduction
Geometric perception, estimating unknown geometric models (e.g., rotations, poses, 3D structure) from visual measurements (e.g., images and point clouds), is a fundamental problem in computer vision, robotics, and graphics. It ﬁnds extensive applications to object detection and localization [95, 98], motion estimation and 3D reconstruction [30, 104], simultaneous localization and mapping [23, 84], shape analysis [71, 78], virtual and augmented reality [58], and medical imaging [8].
A common formulation for geometric perception resorts to optimization to perform estimation: min x∈X (cid:80)N i=1 ρ (r (x, yi)) , (1) where yi ∈ Y, i = 1, . . . , N, are the visual measurements, x ∈ X ⊆ Rn is the to-be-estimated geometric model, r : X × Y → R+ is the residual function that quantiﬁes the disagreement between each measurement yi and the geometric model x, and ρ : R+ → R+ is the cost function that determines how residuals are penalized. When the distribution of the measurement noise is known, maximum likelihood estimation provides a systematic way to design ρ; for instance, assuming 1Code available at https://github.com/MIT-SPARK/CertifiablyRobustPerception. 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
Figure 1: A general and practical framework for certiﬁably robust geometric perception with outliers.
Gaussian noise leads to the popular least squares cost function ρ(r) = r2 [51, 81, 45]. However, in practice, a large amount of measurements, called outliers, depart from the assumed noise distribution (e.g., due to sensor failure or incorrect data association). Therefore, a robust cost function, such as the (cid:96)1-norm [91], Huber [52], Geman-McClure [99], and truncated least squares [96], is necessary to prevent the outliers from corrupting the estimate. Both the constraints –deﬁning the domain X – and the objective function in (1) are typically nonconvex in geometric perception problems.
Solving geometric perception with optimality guarantees is of paramount importance for safety-critical and high-integrity applications such as autonomous driving and space robotics. Indeed, suboptimal solutions of (1) typically correspond to poor or outlier-contaminated estimates [99].
However, obtaining globally optimal solutions, particularly in the presence of outliers, remains a challenging task.