Abstract
To analyse visual systems, the concept of an ideal observer promises an optimal response for a given task. Bayesian ideal observers can provide optimal responses under uncertainty, if they are given the true distributions as input. In visual search tasks, prior studies have used signal to noise ratio (SNR) or psychophysics ex-periments to set the distributional parameters for simple targets on backgrounds with known patterns, however these methods do not easily translate to complex targets on natural scenes. Here, we develop a model of target detectability in natural images to estimate the parameters of target-present and target-absent distri-butions for a visual search task. We present a novel approach for approximating the foveated detectability of a known target in natural backgrounds based on biological aspects of human visual system. Our model considers both the uncertainty about target position and the visual system’s variability due to its reduced performance in the periphery compared to the fovea. Our automated prediction algorithm uses trained logistic regression as a post processing phase of a pre-trained deep neural network. Eye tracking data from 12 observers detecting targets on natural image backgrounds are used as ground truth to tune foveation parameters and evaluate the model, using cross-validation. Finally, the model of target detectability is used in a
Bayesian ideal observer model of visual search, and compared to human search performance. 1

Introduction
Humans have evolved a foveated visual system which, instead of processing an entire view with uniform resolution, receives higher spatial detail in the centre of the visual ﬁeld (the fovea). Thus, in a visual search, the eyes make a series of movements to direct the high-resolution fovea to different parts of a scene in order to ﬁnd the target [1]. This process is constrained by limitations of the visual system, namely lower acuity and degraded ability to resolve feature locations in the visual periphery, resulting in target location uncertainty [2; 3; 4]. However, most models of human visual search and attention are based on the concept of saliency [5; 6]; they do not model target detectability and are not able to predict optimal eye movement sequences. Similarly, most computer vision object detectors are based on discriminative models which do not predict target detection uncertainty[7].
A Bayesian ideal observer makes optimal decisions under uncertainty. Modelling a visual search task as a Bayesian ideal observer problem [8], we assume that the visual system computes a series of optimal eye movements that reduces the uncertainty of target location. However, this assumes that the detectability of the target is known across the visual ﬁeld. This process has been modeled for simple targets in noise images, and has been shown to predict human eye movements in these
∗The code to reproduce the results of the paper can be found at https://github.com/rashidis/bio_ based_detectability 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
search tasks [8; 9; 10]. Various approaches have been proposed for calculating the detectability of targets in the visual ﬁeld, often based on signal detection theory or estimated from psychophysical experiments [11; 12; 13; 14]. However, there has been little work on automatically estimating the detectability for object targets in natural scenes.
In this paper, we present a novel approach for calculating the foveated detectability of an object target on natural background images, which can be fed to a Bayesian ideal observer in a visual search task.
Our approach is based on signal detection theory and uses the extracted features of target-absent and target-present images to estimate the parameters of the probability distributions. Given the distributions, target detectability is estimated as a measure of the distributions’ discriminability. Our method uses a logistic regression classiﬁer as a post processing phase of a pre-trained deep neural network in a pipeline for parameter estimation. Our model is based on biological aspects of the human visual system and considers both the uncertainty of the target position and the visual system’s increased uncertainty in the periphery due to its reduced performance. To model the detectability of targets across different eccentricities, we use a model of feature pooling similar to [15]. We use human detection performance to calibrate the rate at which detectability changes with eccentricity in the model, and compare the resulting ideal observer model of visual search to human search performance, in a cross-validation design. 2