Abstract
In this paper, we study one challenging issue in multi-view data clustering. To be speciﬁc, for two data matrices X(1) and X(2) corresponding to two views, we do not assume that X(1) and X(2) are fully aligned in row-wise. Instead, we assume that only a small portion of the matrices has established the correspondence in advance. Such a partially view-aligned problem (PVP) could lead to the intensive labor of capturing or establishing the aligned multi-view data, which has less been touched so far to the best of our knowledge. To solve this practical and challenging problem, we propose a novel multi-view clustering method termed partially view-aligned clustering (PVC). To be speciﬁc, PVC proposes to use a differentiable surrogate of the non-differentiable Hungarian algorithm and recasts it as a pluggable module. As a result, the category-level correspondence of the unaligned data could be established in a latent space learned by a neural network, while learning a common space across different views using the “aligned” data.
Extensive experimental results show promising results of our method in clustering partially view-aligned data. 1

Introduction
As one of the most important unsupervised technologies, data clustering has attracted much attention in recent years [22, 16, 6, 34]. Since most of the real-world data are presented in multiple views or modals, it is highly expected to explore and exploit the correlation and invariance across different views for data analysis [33, 30, 14, 27, 41].
In general, most existing multi-view clustering (MVC) approaches jointly learn a common repre-sentation to bridge the gap among different views and then achieve clustering using the common representation. The success of such a learning paradigm highly relies on a “well-established” dataset which has to satisfy two assumptions: 1) completeness of data: It requires that all examples appear in all views. Taking two view matrices V(1) and V(2) as a showcase, it assumes that V(1) and
V(2) are with the same number of rows, where each row denotes a data point; 2) correspondence of views: It requires that V(1) and V(2) have the corrected correspondence in row-wise. In other words,
V(1) and V(2) are fully aligned in advance. With the above two assumptions, the correlation and correspondence of multi-view data are available, thus making learning the common representation and clustering possible.
∗Corresponding author. 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
Based on the above two assumptions, a variety of MVC methods [30, 14, 19, 23, 39, 37, 25] have achieved promising performance. In practice, however, it is a daunting task to collect the complete and fully-aligned multi-view data due to the complexity and discordancy in time and space. In other words, these existing works probably fail whether the data is with partially data-missing problem (PDP) or partially view-aligned problem (PVP). More speciﬁcally, PDP assumes that all views would miss some data and therefore results in many partial examples, i.e., examples with some views missing. Recently, some works have attempted to solve this challenging problem [9, 31, 28].
In this paper, we focus on the solution of PVP rather than PDP. To the best of our knowledge, there are few efforts towards solving PVP in MVC so far. In PVP, only a portion of data is aligned across v=1, only {A(v)}m v=1 = {A(v), U(v)}m different views. Formally, for a given dataset {X(v)}m v=1 are aligned with correct correspondence while the correspondence of {U(v)}m v=1 is unknown. Here, v denotes which view and m denotes the total view number. A typical example of PVP is street surveillance as shown in Fig. 1. In the example, several cameras correspond to multiple views. Due to the inconsistency and complexity in time and space, an interest of object may appear in another monitor at different time t1 with different position p1, thus leading to the partially-aligned multi-view data. It should be pointed out that it is a daunting task to solve this problem due to the following three reasons. First, it is impossible to utilize the label to perform view alignment in the unsupervised setting such as clustering. Second, although the vanilla graph match methods such as Hungarian algorithm [10] could be used to seek the correspondence of views. However, it is impossible to plug it into a neural network due to the non-differentiable property of the Hungarian algorithm. Third, it is expected to jointly learn common representation and perform alignment into a uniﬁed framework so that the partially aligned information could be utilized to facilitate the multi-view clustering performance.
To this end, we propose possibly the ﬁrst study on partially view-aligned clustering (PVC). To be exact, PVC establishes the correspondence of unaligned data with the help of the ground-truth aligned data, while learning a common representation by preserving the view-speciﬁc structure and cross-view consistency. The contributions of this work could be summarized as follows:
• We propose a new paradigm for multi-view clustering, termed partially view-aligned prob-lem. The PVP is pervasive but ignored in a variety of real-world applications and our solution to this problem could alleviate even avoid the daunting assumption of correspondence of views in data collection.
• To tackle the partially view-aligned problem in MVC, we propose a novel neural network which simultaneously aligns a given partially aligned dataset in a latent space and learns the common representation across different views. The alignment module is a differentiable surrogate of the Hungarian algorithm, which could be plugged into any neural network to embrace the joint optimization with back-propagation. To the best of our knowledge, this could be the ﬁrst effective deep solution which makes clustering partially view-aligned data possible. 2