Abstract
This paper focuses on estimating probability distributions over the set of 3D ro-tations (SO(3)) using deep neural networks. Learning to regress models to the set of rotations is inherently difﬁcult due to differences in topology between
RN and SO(3). We overcome this issue by using a neural network to out-put the parameters for a matrix Fisher distribution since these parameters are homeomorphic to R9. By using a negative log likelihood loss for this distri-bution we get a loss which is convex with respect to the network outputs. By optimizing this loss we improve state-of-the-art on several challenging applica-ble datasets, namely Pascal3D+, ModelNet10-SO(3). Our code is available at https://github.com/Davmo049/Public_prob_orientation_estimation_with_matrix
_ﬁsher_distributions 1

Introduction
Estimating the 3D rotation of an object from 2D images is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision. Several applications relying on 3D rotation estimation have been developed such as a robot grasping an object[23], a self driving vehicle constantly sensing its surrounding environment
[18], an augmented reality system combining computer-generated information onto the real world
[16], or a system detecting the face orientation to enhance human-computer interactions [25].
Advances of deep learning techniques have resulted in improvements in estimation of 3D orientation.
However, precise orientation estimation remains an open problem. The main problem is that the space of all 3D rotations lies on a nonlinear and closed manifold, referred to as the special orthogonal group SO(3). This manifold has a different topology than unconstrained values in RN , where neural network outputs exist. As a result it is hard to design a loss function which is continuous without disconnected local minima. For example using euler angles as an intermediate step causes problems due to the so-called gimbal lock. Quaternions have a double embedding giving rise to the existence of two disconnected local minimas. Some more complicated methods use Gram-Schmidt [30] which has a continuous inverse, but the function is not continuous with a discontinuity when the input vectors do not span R3.
Despite these issues various deep learning based solutions have been suggested. One approach is to use one of the rotation representations and model the constraint in the loss function or in the network architecture [14]. An alternative is to construct a mapping function, which directly converts the network output to a rotation matrix [30].
Quantifying the 3D orientation uncertainty when dealing with noisy or otherwise difﬁcult inputs is also an important task. Uncertainty estimation provides valuable information about the quality of the prediction during the process of decision making. Only recent efforts have been made on modeling the uncertainty of 3D rotation estimation [20, 5]. However, those methods still rely on complex solutions to fulﬁl the constraints required by their parameterization. 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
In this paper, we instead propose a deep learning approach to estimate the 3D rotation uncertainty by using the matrix Fisher probability density function developed in the ﬁeld of directional statistics
[17]. This unimodal distribution has been selected because of its relevant properties in regards to the problem of 3D orientation estimation: i) The parameterization is unconstrained so there is no need for complex functions to enforce constraints. ii) It is possible to create a loss for this distribution which has desirable properties such as convexity iii) The mode of the distribution can subsequently be estimated along with the uncertainty around that mode for further analysis.
Our method offers a simple solution to the problem of 3D orientation estimation, where a neural network learns to regress the parameters of the matrix Fisher distribution. While several other losses used for rotation estimation are discontinuous with non path connected sublevel sets, with respect to the network output. In this paper we instead propose a loss which is convex with bounded gradient magnitudes, resulting in a stable training. In addition, we also implement a method for computing the the non-trivial normalizing constant of the distribution. Finally, the proposed method is evaluated on multiple problem domains and compared with the latest published approaches. The results show that our method outperforms all previous methods for several problems.
Our contributions include: 1) a method for estimating a probability distributions over the set of rotations with neural networks by using the matrix Fisher distribution, 2) a loss associated with this distribution and show it is convex with bounded gradients, and 3) an extensive analysis encompassing several datasets and recent orientation estimation works, where we demonstrate the superiority of our method over the state-of-the-art. 2