Abstract
Learning from visual observations is a fundamental yet challenging problem in
Reinforcement Learning (RL). Although algorithmic advances combined with convolutional neural networks have proved to be a recipe for success, current methods are still lacking on two fronts: (a) data-efﬁciency of learning and (b) gen-eralization to new environments. To this end, we present Reinforcement Learning with Augmented Data (RAD), a simple plug-and-play module that can enhance most RL algorithms. We perform the ﬁrst extensive study of general data aug-mentations for RL on both pixel-based and state-based inputs, and introduce two new data augmentations - random translate and random amplitude scale. We show that augmentations such as random translate, crop, color jitter, patch cutout, random convolutions, and amplitude scale can enable simple RL algorithms to outperform complex state-of-the-art methods across common benchmarks. RAD sets a new state-of-the-art in terms of data-efﬁciency and ﬁnal performance on the DeepMind Control Suite benchmark for pixel-based control as well as Ope-nAI Gym benchmark for state-based control. We further demonstrate that RAD signiﬁcantly improves test-time generalization over existing methods on several
OpenAI ProcGen benchmarks. Our RAD module and training code are available at https://www.github.com/MishaLaskin/rad. 1

Introduction
Learning from visual observations is a fundamental problem in reinforcement learning (RL). Current success stories build on two key ideas: (a) using expressive convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [1] that provide strong spatial inductive bias; (b) better credit assignment [2–4] techniques that are crucial for sequential decision making. This combination of CNNs with modern RL algorithms has led to impressive success with human-level performance in Atari [2], super-human Go players [5], continuous control from pixels [3, 4] and learning policies for real-world robot grasping [6].
While these achievements are truly impressive, RL is notoriously plagued with poor data-efﬁciency and generalization capabilities [7, 8]. Real-world successes of reinforcement learning often require months of data-collection and (or) training [6, 9]. On the other hand, biological agents have the remarkable ability to learn quickly [10, 11], while being able to generalize to a wide variety of unseen tasks [12]. These challenges associated with RL are further exacerbated when we operate on pixels due to high-dimensional and partially-observable inputs. Bridging the gap of data-efﬁciency and generalization is hence pivotal to the real-world applicability of RL.
Supervised learning, in the context of computer vision, has addressed the problems of data-efﬁciency and generalization by injecting useful priors. One such often ignored prior is Data Augmentation. It
⇤Equal contribution. 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
was critical to the early successes of CNNs [1, 13] and has more recently enabled better supervised [14, 15], semi-supervised [16–18] and self-supervised [19–21] learning. By using multiple augmented views of the same data-point as input, CNNs are forced to learn consistencies in their internal representations. This results in a visual representation that improves generalization [17, 19–21], data-efﬁciency [16, 19, 20] and transfer learning [19, 21].
Inspired by the impact of data augmentation in computer vision, we present RAD: Reinforcement
Learning with Augmented Data, a technique to incorporate data augmentations on input observations for reinforcement learning pipelines. Through RAD, we ensure that the agent is learning on multiple views (or augmentations) of the same input (see Figure 1). This allows the agent to improve on two key capabilities: (a) data-efﬁciency: learning to quickly master the task at hand with drastically fewer experience rollouts; (b) generalization: improving transfer to unseen tasks or levels simply by training on more diversely augmented samples. To the best of our knowledge, we present the ﬁrst extensive study of the use of data augmentation for reinforcement learning with no changes to the underlying RL algorithm and no additional assumptions about the domain other than the knowledge that the agent operates from image-based or proprioceptive (positions & velocities) observations.
We highlight the main contributions of RAD below:
•
•
•
We show that RAD outperforms prior state-of-the-art baselines on both the widely used pixel-based DeepMind control benchmark [22] as well as state-based OpenAI Gym benchmark [23].
On both benchmark, RAD sets a new state-of-the-art in terms data-efﬁciency and asymptotic performance on the majority of environments tested.
We show that RAD signiﬁcantly improves test-time generalization on several environments in the OpenAI ProcGen benchmark suite [24] widely used for generalization in RL.
We introduce two new data augmentations: random translation for image-based input and random amplitude scaling for proprioceptive input that are utilized to achieve state-of-the-art results. To the best of our knowledge, these augmentations were not used in prior work. 2