Abstract
For mental disorders, patients’ underlying mental states are non-observed latent con-structs which have to be inferred from observed multi-domain measurements such as diagnostic symptoms and patient functioning scores. Additionally, substantial heterogeneity in the disease diagnosis between patients needs to be addressed for optimizing individualized treatment policy in order to achieve precision medicine.
To address these challenges, we propose an integrated learning framework that can simultaneously learn patients’ underlying mental states and recommend optimal treatments for each individual. This learning framework is based on the measure-ment theory in psychiatry for modeling multiple disease diagnostic measures as arising from the underlying causes (true mental states). It allows incorporation of the multivariate pre- and post-treatment outcomes as well as biological measures while preserving the invariant structure for representing patients’ latent mental states. A multi-layer neural network is used to allow complex treatment effect heterogeneity. Optimal treatment policy can be inferred for future patients by com-paring their potential mental states under different treatments given the observed multi-domain pre-treatment measurements. Experiments on simulated data and a real-world clinical trial data show that the learned treatment polices compare favorably to alternative methods on heterogeneous treatment effects, and have broad utilities which lead to better patient outcomes on multiple domains. 1

Introduction
For mental disorders, patients’ mental states are of primary interest and are crucial for optimizing indi-vidualized treatment policy. However, a patient’s true mental state is not observed due to the complex nature of the disease. We only have assessments from disease diagnostic symptoms in an instrument or questionnaire that consists of multiple items (an item is a variable on an instrument/questionnaire).
For example, the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D, [6]), which consists of 17 diagnostic symptom items, is designed to measure a patient’s depression severity. Therefore, a patient’s true underlying mental status needs to be inferred based on the the observed multi-domain measurements in order to prescribe optimal treatments and achieve precision medicine. 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
Current methods for learning individualized treatment rules (ITRs) focus on optimizing a single observed outcome variable. For example, the sum score of the 17 symptom items in HAM-D has been used as the outcome variable for learning ITRs for treating depression. However, there are some limitations for using such a simple summary score. First, questions in HAM-D such as “insomnia: early in the night”, “insomnia: middle of the night”, “insomnia: early morning”, “suicidal idea”, and “loss of weight”, etc., are only partial reﬂections of a patient’s true underlying mental states.
Furthermore, they are not equal reﬂective measures of depression [5]. Second, several items overlap and tap on similar construct (e.g., 3 items about insomnia in HAM-D). Taking a simple sum of the symptom scores does not differentiate the items. Therefore, a simple summary score of the observed measurements can not give a full and accurate assessment of the disorder and may not serve as an adequate representation of a patient’s true underlying mental states for treatment recommendation.
On the other hand, in psychiatry and psychology, measurement models (e.g., factor analysis models, item response theory models) have a long history of using latent variables to capture the underlying constructs that describe relations among a class of events or variables that share common disease causes [4]. The observable phenomena (e.g., psychological measurements) are inﬂuenced by the underlying shared causes/constructs (e.g., true mental functions), and these underlying constructs ex-plains the correlations among the observed measures. By modeling the lower-dimensional underlying latent constructs, the noise in the observed symptoms (e.g., weight loss not due to depression) can be eliminated while the meaningful latent constructs (e.g., underlying mental functions) are manifested.
Therefore, leveraging the measurement model theory, we propose an integrated framework for repre-senting patients’ latent mental states based on the observed indicative psychological measurements while learning optimal treatments that maximize individuals’ underlying mental states (graphical representation shown in Figure 1.a). The proposed model incorporates observed multi-domain mea-surements from both pre- and post-treatment phases, while the invariant representation structure is preserved guided by measurement model theory. A multi-layer neural network is used to model the complex treatment effect mechanism between the latent mental states and patients’ biological factors. Optimal treatment policy can be inferred for future patients based on their pre-treatment measurements by comparing the potential mental states under different treatments estimated from the model. The proposed model utilizes data from randomized controlled trials (RCTs), which is considered as the “gold standard” for comparing treatment effects since treatment assignments are randomized and thus free from unobserved confounding. Using data from RCTs, we can learn ITRs with causal interpretations, and we describe the details in section 3. However, our method can easily be modiﬁed to learn ITRs from observational data, and we discuss it in section 5. 2