Abstract
Keypoint detector and descriptor are two main components of point cloud registra-tion. Previous learning-based keypoint detectors rely on saliency estimation for each point or farthest point sample (FPS) for candidate points selection, which are inefﬁcient and not applicable in large scale scenes. This paper proposes Random
Sample-based Keypoint Detector and Descriptor Network (RSKDD-Net) for large scale point cloud registration. The key idea is using random sampling to efﬁciently select candidate points and using a learning-based method to jointly generate key-points and descriptors. To tackle the information loss of random sampling, we exploit a novel random dilation cluster strategy to enlarge the receptive ﬁeld of each sampled point and an attention mechanism to aggregate the positions and features of neighbor points. Furthermore, we propose a matching loss to train the descriptor in a weakly supervised manner. Extensive experiments on two large scale outdoor
LiDAR datasets show that the proposed RSKDD-Net achieves state-of-the-art performance with more than 15 times faster than existing methods. Our code is available at https://github.com/ispc-lab/RSKDD-Net. 1

Introduction
Point cloud registration is an important problem in 3D computer vision, which aims to estimate the optimal rigid transformation between two point clouds. 3D keypoint detection and description are two fundamental components of point cloud registration. Inspired by numerous handcrafted 2D keypoint detectors and descriptors [1–3], researchers proposed several handcrafted 3D keypoint detectors
[4–6] and descriptors [7–11] for point cloud. However, additional RGB channels in images contain richer information than Euclidean coordinates of point cloud without RGB information, which makes handcrafted 3D keypoint detectors and descriptors less reliable than that in 2D images.
With the rapid development of deep learning, many works have explored learning-based methods for 3D descriptors in point cloud [12–15]. However, only a few works explore deep learning-based methods in 3D keypoint detection due to the lack of ground truth dataset for keypoint detector [16]. 3DFeatNet[17] and USIP[16] are two pioneering works of learning-based keypoint detectors, however, they have less efﬁciency consideration. 3DFeatNet predicts saliency for each input point and select keypoints based on the predicted saliency. The per-point saliency estimation requires a considerable time thus is not applicable in practice. USIP relies on FPS to generate keypoint candidates. However,
FPS has a time complexity of O(N 2), therefore is inefﬁcient and time-consuming. Hence, both two
∗Corresponding author 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
Figure 1: Network architecture of our proposed RSKDD-Net. The top row is the overall structure of the whole network, the middle row is detector network and the bottom row is descriptor network. methods above can not efﬁciently process large scale point clouds, which restricts their applications in scenes that require real-time performance, such as autonomous driving.
Based on the above observation, we propose our network named as Random Sample-based Keypoint
Detector and Descriptor Network (RSKDD-Net), which jointly generates keypoints and the corre-sponding descriptors for large scale point cloud efﬁciently. In this paper, we introduce the random sample concept in RSKDD-Net to improve the efﬁciency of our network, which is ill-considered in 3DFeatNet and USIP. Random sampling is highly efﬁcient and has been utilized in point cloud semantic segmentation to improve the efﬁciency [18], however, can lead to a considerable information loss. Inspired by the success of dilation strategy in deep learning of 2D image [19], we propose a novel random dilation strategy to cluster neighbor points, which signiﬁcantly enlarges the receptive
ﬁeld. We exploit attention mechanism to aggregate the positions and features of neighbor points to generate keypoints and also an attentive feature map to estimate saliency uncertainty of each keypoint. The generative framework avoids inefﬁcient per-point saliency estimation in 3DFeatNet
[17]. To jointly learn keypoint detector and descriptor, the clusters and attentive feature maps are further fed into the descriptor network to generate descriptors. To train the descriptor in a weakly supervised manner, we introduce the matching loss, which utilizes a soft assignment strategy to estimate correspondences of keypoints. The network architecture can be seen in Fig. 1.
Extensive experiments are performed to evaluate our RSKDD-Net. The results show that our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance with much lower computation time.
Contribution To summarize, our main contributions are as follows:
• We propose a deep learning-based method to jointly detect keypoints and generate descriptors for large scale point cloud registration. The proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance with a more than 15× higher speed. 2
• We propose a novel random dilation strategy to enlarge the receptive ﬁeld, which signiﬁ-cantly improves the performance of keypoint detector and descriptor. Besides, an attention mechanism is introduced to aggregate the positions and features of neighbor points.
• We propose an effective matching loss based on soft assignment strategy so that the descriptor can be trained in a weakly supervised manner. 2