Abstract
Detecting where and when brain regions activate in a cognitive task or in a given clinical condition is the promise of non-invasive techniques like magnetoen-cephalography (MEG) or electroencephalography (EEG). This problem, referred to as source localization, or source imaging, poses however a high-dimensional statistical inference challenge. While sparsity promoting regularizations have been proposed to address the regression problem, it remains unclear how to ensure statistical control of false detections. Moreover, M/EEG source imaging requires to work with spatio-temporal data and autocorrelated noise. To deal with this, we adapt the desparsiﬁed Lasso estimator —an estimator tailored for high dimensional linear model that asymptotically follows a Gaussian distribution under sparsity and moderate feature correlation assumptions— to temporal data corrupted with autocorrelated noise. We call it the desparsiﬁed multi-task Lasso (d-MTLasso). We combine d-MTLasso with spatially constrained clustering to reduce data dimension and with ensembling to mitigate the arbitrary choice of clustering; the resulting esti-mator is called ensemble of clustered desparsiﬁed multi-task Lasso (ecd-MTLasso).
With respect to the current procedures, the two advantages of ecd-MTLasso are that i)it offers statistical guarantees and ii)it allows to trade spatial speciﬁcity for sensi-tivity, leading to a powerful adaptive method. Extensive simulations on realistic head geometries, as well as empirical results on various MEG datasets, demonstrate the high recovery performance of ecd-MTLasso and its primary practical beneﬁt: offer a statistically principled way to threshold MEG/EEG source maps. 1

Introduction
Source imaging with magnetoencephalography (MEG) and electroencephalography (EEG) delivers insights into brain activity with high temporal and good spatial resolution in a non-invasive way (Bail-let et al., 2001). It however requires to solve the bioelectromagnetic inverse problem, which is a high-dimensional ill-posed regression problem. Various approaches have been proposed to regularize the estimation of the regression coefﬁcients that map activity to brain locations. Historically, (cid:96)2 regularization was considered ﬁrst (Hämäläinen and Ilmoniemi, 1994), with successive improvements known as dSPM (Dale et al., 2000) and sLORETA (Pascual-Marqui, 2002) that are referred to as
“noise normalized” solutions. The reason is that the coefﬁcients are standardized with an estimate 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
of the noise standard deviation, producing outputs that are comparable to T or F statistics, yet not statistically calibrated. These latter techniques have since become standard when using (cid:96)2 approaches.
More recently, alternative approaches based on sparsity assumptions have been proposed with the ambition to improve the spatial speciﬁcity of M/EEG source imaging (Matsuura and Okabe, 1995;
Haufe et al., 2009; Gramfort et al., 2012; Lucka et al., 2012; Wipf and Nagarajan, 2009). The output of such methods consists of focal sources as opposed to blurred images obtained with (cid:96)2 regularization.
However, obtaining statistics (“noise normalized”) from sparse or non-linear estimators seems challenging, especially since M/EEG data are spatio-temporal data with complex noise structure. A natural way to deal with the temporal dimension is to consider a multi-task estimator and structured sparse priors based on (cid:96)1/(cid:96)2 mixed norms (Ou et al., 2009; Gramfort et al., 2012).
In the statistical literature, some attempts to obtain an estimate of both regression coefﬁcients and their variance have been proposed for linear models in high dimension (Wasserman and Roeder, 2009;
Meinshausen et al., 2009; Bühlmann, 2013). These estimates can then be translated to p-value maps, i.e., maps of p-values associated with each covariate. Some methods adapted for sparse scenarios have then proposed to debias the Lasso to obtain p-values or conﬁdence intervals (Zhang and Zhang, 2014; van de Geer et al., 2014; Javanmard and Montanari, 2014). We refer to such variants as desparsiﬁed
Lasso. Recently, desparsiﬁed extensions of group Lasso have also been considered (Mitra and Zhang, 2016; Stucky and van de Geer, 2018). However, all these previous methods generally lack of power when p (cid:29) n. Here, we propose to address a multi-task setting in the presence of correlated noise, and to deal with high-dimensional when p (cid:29) n leveraging on data structure as done by Chevalier et al. (2018). All these challenges need to be considered for M/EEG source imaging.
Our ﬁrst contribution is to propose the desparsiﬁed multi-task Lasso (d-MTLasso), an extension of the desparsiﬁed Lasso (d-Lasso) (Zhang and Zhang, 2014; van de Geer et al., 2014) to multi-task setting (Obozinski et al., 2010). More precisely, we adapt the group formulation by Mitra and Zhang (2016) to the multi-task setting that enjoys i)a simple statistic test formula with ii)a natural integration of auto-correlated noise and iii)a simpliﬁcation of the assumptions. Our second contribution is to introduce ensemble of clustered desparsiﬁed multi-task Lasso (ecd-MTLasso), which has two advantages compared to current methods: i)it offers statistical guarantees and ii)it allows to trade spatial speciﬁcity for sensitivity, leading to a powerful adaptive method. Our third contribution is an empirical validation of the theoretical claims. In particular, we run extensive simulations on realistic head geometries, as well as empirical results on various MEG datasets to demonstrate the high recovery performance of ecd-MTLasso and its primary practical beneﬁt: offer a statistically principled way to threshold MEG/EEG source maps. 2 Theoretical