Abstract
Multivariate Hawkes processes are commonly used to model streaming networked event data in a wide variety of applications. However, it remains a challenge to extract reliable inference from complex datasets with uncertainty quantiﬁcation.
Aiming towards this, we develop a statistical inference framework to learn causal relationships between nodes from networked data, where the underlying directed graph implies Granger causality. We provide uncertainty quantiﬁcation for the maximum likelihood estimate of the network multivariate Hawkes process by providing a non-asymptotic conﬁdence set. The main technique is based on the concentration inequalities of continuous-time martingales. We compare our method to the previously-derived asymptotic Hawkes process conﬁdence interval, and demonstrate the strengths of our method in an application to neuronal connectivity reconstruction. 1

Introduction
Recently, there has been a surge of interest in using Hawkes processes networks to model discrete events data in both the statistics and the machine learning community (see a review in [20]). The popularity of the model can be attributed to its wide range of applications, including seismology, criminology, epidemiology [24], social networks [14], neural activity [22], and so on. The model is capable of capturing a spatio-temporal triggering effect reﬂected in real-world networks – one event may trigger subsequent events at different locations. Existing works for recovery of the Hawkes network focus on performing point estimators: most of them rely on estimating inﬂuence coefﬁcients (representing the magnitude of the inﬂuence) and thresholding by a pre-speciﬁed value to recover the Hawkes network structure. However, most existing work does not quantify the uncertainty, for instance, in the form of a conﬁdence interval.
One outstanding issue with point estimators is that, without accurate uncertainty quantiﬁcation, one cannot claim any statistical signiﬁcance of the results. For instance, it is difﬁcult to assign a probability to the existence of a directed edge between two nodes. This problem is critical for certain problems, such as causal inference. In Hawkes network models, Granger causality has a very simple form: there is a causal relationship between two nodes in the network if and only if there exists an edge between the two nodes, and there is no casual relationship otherwise [7]. Thus, uncertainty quantiﬁcation (UQ) is critical in scientiﬁc studies, because we wish to test whether a causal relationship exists between one node to another node at a given statistical conﬁdence level. The development of easy-to-implement and robust UQ tools is crucial for a variety of scientiﬁc problems, from medical data to social networks to neural spike train data and more.
In this paper, we study the uncertainty quantiﬁcation for maximum likelihood estimates of multivariate
Hawkes processes over networks. Each node can represent a location, a region of a brain, or a user in a social network. We are particularly interested in recovering the underlying structure (connections) between different nodes with uncertainty quantiﬁcation, meaning providing accurate upper and lower conﬁdence intervals for the inﬂuence coefﬁcients (which is linked to the causal relationships between 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
these nodes). Since we are particularly interested in the existence (or non-existence) of an underlying edge, one of the most critical aspects of our study is to perform network topology recovery. Motivated by applications where the recovery guarantee is usually required, we focus on quantifying the uncertainty of the maximum likelihood estimate of the unknown parameters by providing conﬁdence intervals (CIs). We proposed a novel non-asymptotic approach to establish a general conﬁdence polyhedral set for hidden network inﬂuence parameters (from which the conﬁdence sets can be extracted). The non-asymptotic conﬁdence set is established by constructing a continuous-time martingale using the score function (the gradient of the log-likelihood function) of the network
Hawkes process. This enables us to apply a concentration bound for continuous-time martingales.
The non-asymptotic conﬁdent set is more accurate than the classic asymptotic conﬁdence intervals, since the concentration bound approach captures more than the ﬁrst and second-order moments (which are essentially what the asymptotic conﬁdence intervals are capturing). We compared the two methods for establishing CIs using synthetic neural activity data, to demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.
Contributions. Our main contribution can be summarized as follows: (1) We give a non-asymptotic conﬁdence set for the maximum likelihood estimate (MLE) of the Hawkes process over networks, and (2) Our conﬁdence set is more general and can be approximated by a polyhedron; the CIs can be solved efﬁciently from a linear program. In contrast, the classic CI essentially provides a box in the high-dimensional space for the multi-dimensional parameters.