Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of unsupervised discovery of object landmarks.
We take a different path compared to existing works, based on 2 novel perspec-tives: (1) Self-training: starting from generic keypoints, we propose a self-training approach where the goal is to learn a detector that improves itself, becoming more and more tuned to object landmarks. (2) Correspondence: we identify corre-spondence as a key objective for unsupervised landmark discovery and propose an optimization scheme which alternates between recovering object landmark correspondence across different images via clustering and learning an object land-mark descriptor without labels. Compared to previous works, our approach can learn landmarks that are more ﬂexible in terms of capturing large changes in viewpoint. We show the favourable properties of our method on a variety of dif-ﬁcult datasets including LS3D, BBCPose and Human3.6M. Code is available at https://github.com/malldimi1/UnsupervisedLandmarks. 1

Introduction
Object parts, also known as keypoints or landmarks, convey information about the shape and spatial conﬁguration of an object in 3D space, especially for deformable objects like the human face, body and hand. Prior research has focused on learning landmark detectors in a supervised manner for a few object categories only, for example facial [49, 5, 11] or human body keypoints [25, 2, 44], where thousands of annotated images with landmarks are available. As annotating landmarks for all objects is impractical, this paper focuses on learning landmark detectors in an unsupervised manner.
Unsupervised learning of object landmarks from a ﬁrst glance seems an impossible task. A human annotator has understanding of the notion of objects and their parts, viewpoint invariance, occlusion and self-occlusion as well as examples of which landmarks to annotate in their disposal. Hence, it is completely unclear what machine learning task should be chosen for unsupervised landmark discovery with neural networks. Recent methods have focused on two principles/tasks: equivariance to 2D image transformations [40, 38, 37] and image generation [15, 51, 33]. These methods, despite presenting consistent results for various object categories, have their own limitations such as discovering landmarks with no clear semantic meaning (i.e. landmarks quite different to those annotated by humans)1 and not generalizing well to large viewpoint changes (i.e. 3D rotations). 1We note that our method cannot guarantee to discover semantic landmarks either, but tends to discover landmarks which are more semantically meaningful. 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
Figure 1: Comparison between the landmarks discovered by our approach and those by previous methods. Our approach provides landmarks that can better capture correspondence across large viewpoint changes. For example, there are visible landmarks detected in proﬁle views that are matched with their corresponding points in the frontal view. Moreover, there are detected landmarks that are geometrically consistent in all 3 views. The method of [51] moves the point cloud altogether to ﬁt the face region and hence loses correspondence (e.g. see red or orange point). Also, the method of [15] cannot cope well for such large changes in pose.
In this paper, we propose to take a different approach focusing on 2 novel perspectives: (1) Self-training: for many object categories, manually annotated landmarks are mostly located on edges/corners of an object’s surface, and hence they could be detected by a generic keypoint detector with good repeatability. Starting from generic, noisy keypoints, we propose a self-training approach where the goal is to train a landmark detector which learns to improve itself by dis-covering over the course of training more stable object landmarks and is becoming more tuned to them. (2) Correspondence via clustering: one of the most important properties of a landmark detector is to achieve landmark correspondence across different images of the same category. We propose an optimization scheme which alternates between correspondence recovery via clustering and object landmark descriptor learning without labels. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time that recovering correspondence is applied to the problem of unsupervised discovery of object landmarks.
Compared to previous works, our approach can learn landmarks that are more ﬂexible in terms of capturing changes in 3D viewpoint. See for example Fig. 1. We demonstrate some of the favourable properties of our method on a variety of difﬁcult datasets including LS3D [4], BBCPose [8] and
Human3.6M [14], notably without utilizing temporal information. 2