Recently, crowd density estimation has received increasing attention. The main challenge for this task is to achieve high-quality manual annotations on a large amount of training data. To avoid reliance on such annotations, pre-vious works apply unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) techniques by transferring knowledge learned from easily accessible synthetic data to real-world datasets. However, current state-of-the-art methods either rely on external data for training an auxiliary task or apply an expensive coarse-to-fine estimation. In this work, we aim to develop a new adversarial learning based method, which is simple and efficient to apply. To reduce the domain gap between the synthetic and real data, we design a bi-level alignment framework (BLA) consisting of (1) task-driven data align-ment and (2) fine-grained feature alignment. In contrast to previous domain augmentation methods, we introduce Au-toML to search for an optimal transform on source, which well serves for the downstream task. On the other hand, we do fine-grained alignment for foreground and background separately to alleviate the alignment difficulty. We evaluate our approach on five real-world crowd counting bench-marks, where we outperform existing approaches by a large margin. Also, our approach is simple, easy to implement and efficient to apply. The code is publicly available at https://github.com/Yankeegsj/BLA. (a) Style Transfer (b) Domain Randomization and Task-Driven Data AlignmentFigure 1. Comparison of three different ways for source domain augmentation. (a). Style transfer translates images from source to a target-like domain based on target style priors, but the translation is usually limited to color changes, and blind to the task objective. (b). Domain randomization augments the source domain randomly in a more diverse manner (colors, scales, etc.) but without any pri-ors from target; our proposed task-driven data alignment is more similar to domain randomization; but instead of random selection, we pick the most suitable augmentation based on the task objec-tive, which enables a more dynamic and robust model to the target domain. 