Co-salient object detection (CoSOD) has recently achieved significant progress and played a key role in retrieval-related tasks. However, it inevitably poses an en-tirely new safety and security issue, i.e., highly personal and sensitive content can potentially be extracting by power-ful CoSOD methods. In this paper, we address this prob-lem from the perspective of adversarial attacks and identify a novel task: adversarial co-saliency attack. Specially, given an image selected from a group of images contain-ing some common and salient objects, we aim to generate an adversarial version that can mislead CoSOD methods to predict incorrect co-salient regions. Note that, compared with general white-box adversarial attacks for classifica-tion, this new task faces two additional challenges: (1) low success rate due to the diverse appearance of images in the group; (2) low transferability across CoSOD methods due to the considerable difference between CoSOD pipelines.To address these challenges, we propose the very first black-box joint adversarial exposure and noise attack (Jadena), where we jointly and locally tune the exposure and addi-tive perturbations of the image according to a newly de-signed high-feature-level contrast-sensitive loss function.Our method, without any information on the state-of-the-artCoSOD methods, leads to significant performance degra-dation on various co-saliency detection datasets and makes the co-salient objects undetectable. This can have strong practical benefits in properly securing the large number of personal photos currently shared on the Internet. Moreover, our method is potential to be utilized as a metric for evalu-ating the robustness of CoSOD methods.*Ruijun Gao and Qing Guo are co-first authors and contribute equally to this work.†Wei Feng is the corresponding author: wfeng@ieee.orgFigure 1. Overview of the novel problem, adversarial co-saliency attack, and our solution. We expect the perturbed image to be undiscoverable in an even dynamically growing group of images across multiple CoSOD meth-ods (e.g., GICD [52], GCAGC [50], PoolNet [31]), which is much more challenging and practical in real-world scenarios. Note that our attack is black-box and can be performed without references provided in the group. 