The paradigm of training models on massive data with-out label through self-supervised learning (SSL) and fine-tuning on many downstream tasks has become a trend re-cently. However, due to the high training costs and the un-consciousness of downstream usages, most self-supervised learning methods lack the capability to correspond to the diversities of downstream scenarios, as there are various data domains, different vision tasks and latency constraints on models. Neural architecture search (NAS) is one uni-versally acknowledged fashion to conquer the issues above, but applying NAS on SSL seems impossible as there is no label or metric provided for judging model selection.In this paper, we present DATA, a simple yet effective NAS approach specialized for SSL that provides Domain-Aware and Task-Aware pre-training. Specifically, we (i) train a supernet which could be deemed as a set of millions of networks covering a wide range of model scales without any label, (ii) propose a flexible searching mechanism com-patible with SSL that enables finding networks of differ-ent computation costs, for various downstream vision tasks and data domains without explicit metric provided. Instan-tiated With MoCo v2, our method achieves promising re-sults across a wide range of computation costs on down-stream tasks, including image classification, object detec-tion and semantic segmentation. DATA is orthogonal to most existing SSL methods and endows them the ability of customization on downstream needs. Extensive experi-ments on other SSL methods demonstrate the generalizabil-ity of the proposed method. Code is released at https://github.com/GAIA-vision/GAIA-ssl.*Corresponding author.Figure 1. Illustration of how DATA works. We first build a super-net which is a set of many subnets, and train massive models si-multaneously in the regime of self-supervised learning. Then, we propose a unsupervised searching method that enables domain-aware and task-aware model selection without any label. The mechanism enables self-supervised models to fit various scenarios including point,edge and cloud covering different vision tasks like image classification, object detection, and segmentation. Network architectures in figure are ploted by software PlotNeuralNet [25]. 