Many ﬂagship smartphone cameras now use a dedicated neural image signal processor (ISP) to render noisy raw sensor images to the ﬁnal processed output. Training night-mode ISP networks relies on large-scale datasets of image pairs with: (1) a noisy raw image captured with a short exposure and a high ISO gain; and (2) a ground truth low-noise raw image captured with a long exposure and low ISO that has been rendered through the ISP. Capturing such im-age pairs is tedious and time-consuming, requiring careful setup to ensure alignment between the image pairs. In ad-dition, ground truth images are often prone to motion blur due to the long exposure. To address this problem, we pro-pose a method that synthesizes nighttime images from day-time images. Daytime images are easy to capture, exhibit low-noise (even on smartphone cameras) and rarely suffer from motion blur. We outline a processing framework to convert daytime raw images to have the appearance of re-alistic nighttime raw images with different levels of noise.Our procedure allows us to easily produce aligned noisy and clean nighttime image pairs. We show the effective-ness of our synthesis framework by training neural ISPs for nightmode rendering. Furthermore, we demonstrate that using our synthetic nighttime images together with small amounts of real data (e.g., 5% to 10%) yields performance almost on par with training exclusively on real nighttime images. Our dataset and code are available at https://github.com/SamsungLabs/day-to-night.Figure 1.Top row: A high-quality daytime image and a noisy/clean nighttime image pair. While high-quality day images are easy to capture, paired nighttime data, needed for training nightmode neural ISPs, is challenging to acquire. We propose a day-to-night image synthesis framework that converts the daytime images to appear as noisy/clean paired nighttime images suitable for training DNNs. Middle row: Different day-to-night image syn-thesis methods. Bottom row: A neural nightmode ISP trained by our synthetic night images produces more accurate results com-pared to models trained on dimmed day images, or night images synthesized by CycleGAN [37]. Inset shows PSNR in dB. 