backdoor defense. Source code will be available at code.In recent years, the security of AI systems has drawn in-creasing research attention, especially in the medical imag-ing realm. To develop a secure medical image analysis (MIA) system, it is a must to study possible backdoor at-tacks (BAs), which can embed hidden malicious behaviors into the system. However, designing a unified BA method that can be applied to various MIA systems is challenging due to the diversity of imaging modalities (e.g., X-Ray, CT, and MRI) and analysis tasks (e.g., classification, detection, and segmentation). Most existing BA methods are designed to attack natural image classification models, which apply spatial triggers to training images and inevitably corrupt the semantics of poisoned pixels, leading to the failures of attacking dense prediction models. To address this is-sue, we propose a novel Frequency-Injection based Back-door Attack method (FIBA) that is capable of delivering at-tacks in various MIA tasks. Specifically, FIBA leverages a trigger function in the frequency domain that can inject the low-frequency information of a trigger image into the poisoned image by linearly combining the spectral ampli-tude of both images. Since it preserves the semantics of the poisoned image pixels, FIBA can perform attacks on both classification and dense prediction models. Experiments on three benchmarks in MIA (i.e., ISIC-2019 [4] for skin lesion classification, KiTS-19 [17] for kidney tumor segmentation, and EAD-2019 [1] for endoscopic artifact detection), vali-date the effectiveness of FIBA and its superiority over state-of-the-art methods in attacking MIA models and bypassing*Equal contribution. This work was done during an internship at JDExplore Academy.†Yong Xia is the corresponding author. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants 62171377, in part by the Shaanxi Provincial Key Research and Develop-ment Program under Grant 2022GY-084, and in part by the Natural ScienceFoundation of Ningbo City, China, under Grant 2021J052. Dr Jing Zhang is supported by ARC FL-170100117. 