For medical image segmentation, imagine if a model was only trained using MR images in source domain, how about its performance to directly segment CT images in target do-main? This setting, namely generalizable cross-modality segmentation, owning its clinical potential, is much more challenging than other related settings, e.g., domain adap-tation. To achieve this goal, we in this paper propose a novel dual-normalization model by leveraging the aug-mented source-similar and source-dissimilar images dur-ing our generalizable segmentation. To be specific, given a single source domain, aiming to simulate the possible appearance change in unseen target domains, we first uti-lize a nonlinear transformation to augment source-similar and source-dissimilar images. Then, to sufficiently ex-ploit these two types of augmentations, our proposed dual-normalization based model employs a shared backbone yet independent batch normalization layer for separate nor-malization. Afterward, we put forward a style-based selec-tion scheme to automatically choose the appropriate path in the test stage. Extensive experiments on three publicly available datasets, i.e., BraTS, Cross-Modality Cardiac, and Abdominal Multi-Organ datasets, have demonstrated that our method outperforms other state-of-the-art domain generalization methods. Code is available at https:// github.com/zzzqzhou/Dual-Normalization.*Corresponding author: Yinghuan Shi. This work was supported by National Key Research and Development Program of China (2019YFC0118300), NSFC Major Program (62192783), CAAI-HuaweiMindSpore Project (CAAIXSJLJJ-2021-042A), China Postdoctoral Sci-ence Foundation Project (2021M690609), and Jiangsu Natural ScienceFoundation Project (BK20210224).†Ziqi Zhou and Yinghuan Shi are with the State Key Laboratory forNovel Software Technology and National Institute of Healthcare Data Sci-ence, Nanjing University, China. Lei Qi is with the School of ComputerScience and Engineering, Southeast University, China. Xin Yang andDong Ni are with the National-Regional Key Technology Engineering Lab-oratory for Medical Ultrasound, School of Biomedical Engineering, HealthScience Center, the Medical Ultrasound Image Computing Lab, the Mar-shall Laboratory of Biomedical Engineering, Shenzhen University, China. (a) Example slices of T2 & T1. (b) Performance.Figure 1. (a) Example slices from BraTS dataset; (b) Comparison of our method with “DeepAll” and “DoFE” methods on the Cross-center prostate segmentation task and the Cross-modality brain tumor segmentation task. 