Magnetic Resonance Imaging can produce detailed im-ages of the anatomy and physiology of the human body that can assist doctors in diagnosing and treating pathologies such as tumours. However, MRI suffers from very long ac-quisition times that make it susceptible to patient motion artifacts and limit its potential to deliver dynamic treat-ments. Conventional approaches such as Parallel Imag-ing and Compressed Sensing allow for an increase in MRI acquisition speed by reconstructing MR images from sub-sampled MRI data acquired using multiple receiver coils.Recent advancements in Deep Learning combined with Par-allel Imaging and Compressed Sensing techniques have the potential to produce high-ﬁdelity reconstructions from highly accelerated MRI data.In this work we present a novel Deep Learning-based Inverse Problem solver ap-plied to the task of Accelerated MRI Reconstruction, called the Recurrent Variational Network (RecurrentVarNet), by exploiting the properties of Convolutional Recurrent Neu-ral Networks and unrolled algorithms for solving InverseProblems. The RecurrentVarNet consists of multiple recur-rent blocks, each responsible for one iteration of the un-rolled variational optimization scheme for solving the in-verse problem of multi-coil Accelerated MRI Reconstruc-tion. Contrary to traditional approaches, the optimization steps are performed in the observation domain (k-space) instead of the image domain. Each block of the Recur-rentVarNet reﬁnes the observed k-space and comprises a data consistency term and a recurrent unit which takes as input a learned hidden state and the prediction of the previous block. Our proposed method achieves new state of the art qualitative and quantitative reconstruction re-sults on 5-fold and 10-fold accelerated data from a pub-lic multi-coil brain dataset, outperforming previous conven-tional and deep learning-based approaches. Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/NKI-AI/direct.Figure 1. Overview of our proposed framework, Recurrent Varia-tional Network (RecurrentVarNet), applied to the task of multi-coil Accelerated MRI Reconstruction. Our model takes as input sub-sampled MRI data from multiple coils which are reﬁned fol-lowing an iterative gradient descent-like optimization scheme ofT time-steps in the k-space, and outputs an estimate of the ground truth reconstructed image. 