A classical problem in computer vision is to infer a 3D scene representation from few images that can be used to render novel views at interactive rates. Previous work fo-cuses on reconstructing pre-deﬁned 3D representations, e.g. textured meshes, or implicit representations, e.g. radianceﬁelds, and often requires input images with precise camera poses and long processing times for each novel scene.In this work, we propose the Scene Representation Trans-former (SRT), a method which processes posed or unposedRGB images of a new area, infers a “set-latent scene rep-resentation”, and synthesises novel views, all in a single feed-forward pass. To calculate the scene representation, we propose a generalization of the Vision Transformer to sets of images, enabling global information integration, and hence 3D reasoning. An efﬁcient decoder transformer parameter-izes the light ﬁeld by attending into the scene representation to render novel views. Learning is supervised end-to-end by minimizing a novel-view reconstruction error.We show that this method outperforms recent baselines in terms of PSNR and speed on synthetic datasets, including a new dataset created for the paper. Further, we demonstrate that SRT scales to support interactive visualization and se-mantic segmentation of real-world outdoor environments using Street View imagery.⇤Work done while at Google.Contributions: MS: original idea & conceptualization, main implementa-tion, experiments, writing, organization, lead; HM: idea conceptualization, implementation, experiments, writing; EP: implementation, experiments, writing; UB: idea conceptualization, implementation, experiments, writ-ing; KG: dataset support, advising; NR: project-independent code; SV: project-independent code; ML: advising, writing; DD: advising, project-independent code; AD: advising; JU: advising; TF: datasets, advising, writing; AT: advising, writing.Correspondence: srt@msajjadi.com & tutmann@google.comProject website: srt-paper.github.ioFigure 1. Model overview – SRT encodes a collection of images into the scene representation: a set of latent features. Novel views are rendered in real-time by attending into the latent representation with light ﬁeld rays, see Fig. 2 for details. 