We explore the potential of CNN-based models for gall-bladder cancer (GBC) detection from ultrasound (USG) im-ages as no prior study is known. USG is the most common diagnostic modality for GB diseases due to its low cost and accessibility. However, USG images are challenging to ana-lyze due to low image quality, noise, and varying viewpoints due to the handheld nature of the sensor. Our exhaustive study of state-of-the-art (SOTA) image classification tech-niques for the problem reveals that they often fail to learn the salient GB region due to the presence of shadows in theUSG images. SOTA object detection techniques also achieve low accuracy because of spurious textures due to noise or adjacent organs. We propose GBCNet to tackle the chal-lenges in our problem. GBCNet first extracts the regions of interest (ROIs) by detecting the GB (and not the can-cer), and then uses a new multi-scale, second-order pooling architecture specializing in classifying GBC. To effectively handle spurious textures, we propose a curriculum inspired by human visual acuity, which reduces the texture biases in GBCNet. Experimental results demonstrate that GBC-Net significantly outperforms SOTA CNN models, as well as the expert radiologists. Our technical innovations are generic to other USG image analysis tasks as well. Hence, as a validation, we also show the efficacy of GBCNet in detecting breast cancer from USG images. Project page with source code, trained models, and data is available at https://gbc-iitd.github.io/gbcnet.Figure 1. (a), (b), and (c) Normal, benign, and malignant GB sam-ple in USG images, respectively. While normal or benign GB have regular anatomy, clear boundary is absent in malignant GB. (d) A malignant (biopsy-proven) GB sample. (e) Shadows having visual traits of a GB leads to localization error in ResNet50. (f) GBCNet tackles shadow artifacts well. (g) Another sample of malignantGB. (h) The radiologist incorrectly diagnosed the GB as benign based on the stone and wall thickening. (i) GBCNet helps the ra-diologist to identify the salient region with liver infiltration by theGB, a critical feature of GBC, and correct the prediction. 