Large-scale data from the real-world usually follow a long-tailed distribution (i.e., a few majority classes occupy plentiful training data, while most minority classes have few samples), making the hyperplanes heavily skewed to the minority classes. Traditionally, reweighting is adopted to make the hyperplanes fairly split the feature space, where the weights are designed according to the number of sam-ples. However, we find that the number of samples in a class can not accurately measure the size of its spanned space, especially for the majority class, where the size of its spanned space is usually larger than the samples’ num-ber because of the high diversity. Therefore, weights de-signed based on the samples’ number will still compress the space of minority classes. In this paper, we reconsider reweighting from a totally new perspective of analyzing the spanned space of each class. We argue that, besides statisti-cal numbers, relations between samples are also significant for sufficiently depicting the spanned space. Consequently, we estimate the size of the spanned space for each category, namely effective area, by detailedly analyzing its samples’ distribution. By treating samples of a class as identically distributed random variables and analyzing their correla-tions, a simple and non-parametric formula is derived to estimate the effective area. Then, the weight simply cal-culated inversely proportional to the effective area of each class is adopted to achieve fairer training. Note that our weights are more flexible as they can be adaptively adjusted along with the optimizing features during training. Exper-iments on four long-tailed datasets show that the proposed weights outperform the state-of-the-art reweighting meth-ods. Moreover, our method can also achieve better results on statistically balanced CIFAR-10/100. Code is available*Corresponding authorFigure 1. The effective area and statistical number on CIFAR-100-LT under the imbalance ratio of 100. We can see that since sam-ples in “Beaver” are distributed dispersedly with different back-grounds, viewpoints, and poses, their effective area is larger than the samples’ number. Whereas, the effective area of “Clock” is smaller than its number of samples, as samples are highly over-lapped with limited backgrounds and viewpoints. at https://github.com/xiaohua-chen/AREA. 