We present a novel unsupervised domain adaption method for person re-identification (reID) that generalizes a model trained on a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain. We introduce a camera-driven curriculum learning (CaCL) framework that leverages camera labels of person images to transfer knowledge from source to tar-get domains progressively. To this end, we divide target do-main dataset into multiple subsets based on the camera la-bels, and initially train our model with a single subset (i.e., images captured by a single camera). We then gradually exploit more subsets for training, according to a curricu-lum sequence obtained with a camera-driven scheduling rule. The scheduler considers maximum mean discrepan-cies (MMD) between each subset and the source domain dataset, such that the subset closer to the source domain is exploited earlier within the curriculum. For each curricu-lum sequence, we generate pseudo labels of person images in a target domain to train a reID model in a supervised way. We have observed that the pseudo labels are highly biased toward cameras, suggesting that person images ob-tained from the same camera are likely to have the same pseudo labels, even for different IDs. To address the camera bias problem, we also introduce a camera-diversity (CD) loss encouraging person images of the same pseudo label, but captured across various cameras, to involve more for discriminative feature learning, providing person represen-tations robust to inter-camera variations. Experimental re-sults on standard benchmarks, including real-to-real and synthetic-to-real scenarios, demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework.Figure 1: We visualize in (a) a t-SNE plot for features extracted from person images in Market1501 [55] andMSMT17 [45], using a reID model trained on MSMT17, where MSMT17 and Market1501 are source and target do-mains, respectively. The samples from different cameras in the target domain are distinguished by different colors.The model trained on a single domain offers features that are highly biased towards camera labels of person images for other domains. We propose to establish a camera-driven curriculum, as shown in (b), and initially train our model using images captured by a single camera, then gradually exploit more images captured using multiple cameras. To further alleviate the camera bias issue, we compute cluster-wise weights, as in (c), to encourage clusters containing im-ages obtained from various cameras to involve more during the adaptation process. 