Human readers or radiologists routinely perform full-body multi-organ multi-disease detection and diagnosis in clinical practice, while most medical AI systems are built to focus on single organs with a narrow list of a few dis-eases. This might severely limit AI’s clinical adoption. A certain number of AI models need to be assembled non-trivially to match the diagnostic process of a human read-ing a CT scan. In this paper, we construct a Unified Tu-mor Transformer (CancerUniT) model to jointly detect tu-mor existence & location and diagnose tumor characteris-tics for eight major cancers in CT scans. CancerUniT is a query-based Mask Transformer model with the output of multi-tumor prediction. We decouple the object queries into organ queries, tumor detection queries and tumor diagno-sis queries, and further establish hierarchical relationships among the three groups. This clinically-inspired architec-ture effectively assists inter- and intra-organ representation learning of tumors and facilitates the resolution of these complex, anatomically related multi-organ cancer image reading tasks. CancerUniT is trained end-to-end using a curated large-scale CT images of 10,042 patients includ-ing eight major types of cancers and occurring non-cancer tumors (all are pathology-confirmed with 3D tumor masks annotated by radiologists). On the test set of 631 patients,CancerUniT has demonstrated strong performance under a set of clinically relevant evaluation metrics, substantially outperforming both multi-disease methods and an assem-bly of eight single-organ expert models in tumor detection,*Correspondence to Jieneng Chen (jienengchen01@gmail.com),Liu (yingda.xia@alibaba-inc.com),Zaiyi andXiaYingda (zyliu@163.com)Figure 1. We aim at cancer and non-cancer detection, segmenta-tion, and diagnosis in eight major organs via CT scan. Seven of our eight targeted cancers rank the top seven in terms of mortality. segmentation, and diagnosis. This moves one step closer to-wards a universal high performance cancer screening tool. 