Deep learning empowers the mainstream medical im-age segmentation methods. Nevertheless, current deep seg-mentation approaches are not capable of efficiently and ef-fectively adapting and updating the trained models when new segmentation classes are incrementally added. In the real clinical environment, it can be preferred that segmenta-tion models could be dynamically extended to segment new organs/tumors without the (re-)access to previous training datasets due to obstacles of patient privacy and data stor-age. This process can be viewed as a continual semantic segmentation (CSS) problem, being understudied for multi-organ segmentation. In this work, we propose a new archi-tectural CSS learning framework to learn a single deep seg-mentation model for segmenting a total of 143 whole-body organs. Using the encoder/decoder network structure, we demonstrate that a continually trained then frozen encoder coupled with incrementally-added decoders can extract suf-ficiently representative image features for new classes to be subsequently and validly segmented, while avoiding the catastrophic forgetting in CSS. To maintain a single network model complexity, each decoder is progressively pruned us-ing neural architecture search and teacher-student based knowledge distillation. Finally, we propose a body-part and anomaly-aware output merging module to combine organ predictions originating from different decoders and incor-porate both healthy and pathological organs appearing in different datasets. Trained and validated on 3D CT scans of 2500+ patients from four datasets, our single network can segment a total of 143 whole-body organs with very high accuracy, closely reaching the upper bound performance level by training four separate segmentation models (i.e., one model per dataset/task).† ZJ and DG contribute equally. ∗ For correspondence, please contactXY (hye1982@zju.edu.cn) and DJ (dakai.jin@alibaba-inc.com).Figure 1. Illustration of the continual multi-organ segmentation.At each continual learning step, only the previously trained model is available (green arrow). Previous datasets are not accessible. We allow organs from different datasets to have overlaps, and these datasets may also contain diseased organs (with tumors). 