Domain generalization (DG) aims to learn domain-generalizable models from one or multiple source domains that can perform well in unseen target domains. Despite its recent progress, most existing work suffers from the mis-alignment between the difficulty level of training samples and the capability of contemporarily trained models, lead-ing to over-fitting or under-fitting in the trained general-ization model. We design MoDify, a Momentum Difficulty framework that tackles the misalignment by balancing the seesaw between the model’s capability and the samples’ dif-ficulties along the training process. MoDify consists of two novel designs that collaborate to fight against the misalign-ment while learning domain-generalizable models. The first is MoDify-based Data Augmentation which exploits anRGB Shuffle technique to generate difficulty-aware train-ing samples on the fly. The second is MoDify-based Net-work Optimization which dynamically schedules the train-ing samples for balanced and smooth learning with appro-priate difficulty. Without bells and whistles, a simple imple-mentation of MoDify achieves superior performance across multiple benchmarks. In addition, MoDify can complement existing methods as a plug-in, and it is generic and can work for different visual recognition tasks.Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed MoDify framework. Train-ing domain-generalizable models often suffer from clear under-fitting (or over-fitting) if keep feeding over-difficult (or over-easy) training samples, especially at the early (or later) training stage, both leading to degraded generalization of the trained models (as illustrated in yellow/blue lines).Inspired by the Flow The-ory [16] that a learner usually has better learning outcome when the learner’s skill and the task difficulty are well aligned (i.e., ly-ing within the Flow Channel), the proposed MoDify schedules the training samples adaptively according to the alignment between the sample difficulty and the capability of contemporarily trained models (as illustrated in red line). 