Fingerprinting is a promising non-invasive method for protecting the intellectual property rights (IPR) of deep neu-ral network (DNN) models. It extracts a feature called aﬁngerprint from a DNN model to identify its ownership. Ex-isting ﬁngerprinting methods focus only on classiﬁcation-related models that map images to labels, while inapplica-ble to models for image restoration that map images to im-ages. This paper proposes a ﬁngerprinting framework forDNN models of image restoration. The proposed framework deﬁnes the ﬁngerprint using a critical image, which exhibits strongly discriminative patterns and is robust to modest model modiﬁcations. Model ownership is then veriﬁed by comparing the distance of color histograms and local gra-dient pattern histograms of critical images between the sus-pect and source models. We apply the proposed framework to two representative tasks, denoising and super-resolution.It outperforms the baselines of ﬁngerprinting and competes against existing invasive model watermarking methods. for adversaries to plagiarize/steal the models, using meth-ods such as malware infection or internal leaks, to bypass the expensive training process. Consequently, both the com-munity and companies have a strong motivation to protect the IPR of their DNN models.One popular approach for protecting the IPR of DNN models is model watermarking (e.g. [44, 1, 10, 7, 53, 8, 39, 20, 54, 21]), which invasively embeds speciﬁc information called watermark into the source model and examines its existence in the suspect model for ownership veriﬁcation.However, modifying model weights can potentially affect the model’s utility, making it less desirable in practice.Recently, a non-invasive approach called model ﬁnger-printing has gained attention. Unlike watermarking, ﬁnger-printing keeps the model intact and creates a unique feature called ﬁngerprint from the model for identifying ownership.The ownership of a model is veriﬁed by comparing the ﬁn-gerprint of the source model with that of the suspect model.While ﬁngerprinting is still in its early stages with few ex-isting works [3, 24, 11, 60, 33], it is gaining popularity as a non-invasive alternative to model watermarking. 