State-of-the-art lane detection methods often rely on spe-cific knowledge about lanes – such as straight lines and parametric curves – to detect lane lines. While the specific knowledge can ease the modeling process, it poses chal-lenges in handling lane lines with complex topologies (e.g., dense, forked, curved, etc.). Recently, dynamic convolution-based methods have shown promising performance by uti-lizing the features from some key locations of a lane line, such as the starting point, as convolutional kernels, and convoluting them with the whole feature map to detect lane lines. While such methods reduce the reliance on specific knowledge, the kernels computed from the key locations fail to capture the lane line’s global structure due to its long and thin structure, leading to inaccurate detection of lane lines with complex topologies. In addition, the kernels re-sulting from the key locations are sensitive to occlusion and lane intersections. To overcome these limitations, we pro-pose a transformer-based dynamic kernel generation archi-tecture for lane detection. It utilizes a transformer to gen-erate dynamic convolutional kernels for each lane line in the input image, and then detect these lane lines with dy-namic convolution. Compared to the kernels generated from the key locations of a lane line, the kernels generated with the transformer can capture the lane line’s global struc-ture from the whole feature map, enabling them to effec-tively handle occlusions and lane lines with complex topolo-gies. We evaluate our method on three lane detection bench-marks, and the results demonstrate its state-of-the-art per-formance. Specifically, our method achieves an F1 score of 63.40 on OpenLane and 88.47 on CurveLanes, surpassing the state of the art by 4.30 and 2.37 points, respectively.*Corresponding Author. This work was supported in part by the Aus-tralian Research Council for funding of the ARC Training Centre in Op-timisation Technologies, Integrated Methodologies and Applications (OP-TIMA), under grant IC200100009. This work is also supported in part by the computational resources of the Spartan HPC system at UniMelb.Figure 1. Examples of lanes lines in real scenes. The lane lines often have complex topologies, and are in diverse road scenarios. (a) The lane lines are blocked by vehicles. (b) The lane lines have forked and curved structures. (c) The lane lines are dense and blocked. (d) The lane lines are extremly curved. The lighting and weather conditions in these four pictures are also very different. 