Sign Language Translation (SLT) is a challenging task due to its cross-domain nature, involving the translation of visual-gestural language to text. Many previous meth-ods employ an intermediate representation, i.e., gloss se-quences, to facilitate SLT, thus transforming it into a two-stage task of sign language recognition (SLR) followed by sign language translation (SLT). However, the scarcity of gloss-annotated sign language data, combined with the information bottleneck in the mid-level gloss representa-tion, has hindered the further development of the SLT task. To address this challenge, we propose a novel Gloss-Free SLT based on Visual-Language Pretraining (GFSLT-VLP), which improves SLT by inheriting language-oriented prior knowledge from pre-trained models, without any gloss annotation assistance. Our approach involves two (i) integrating Contrastive Language-Image Pre-stages: training (CLIP) with masked self-supervised learning to create pre-tasks that bridge the semantic gap between vi-sual and textual representations and restore masked sen-tences, and (ii) constructing an end-to-end architecture with an encoder-decoder-like structure that inherits the param-eters of the pre-trained Visual Encoder and Text Decoder from the ﬁrst stage. The seamless combination of these novel designs forms a robust sign language representation and signiﬁcantly improves gloss-free sign language trans-lation. In particular, we have achieved unprecedented im-provements in terms of BLEU-4 score on the PHOENIX14T dataset (≥+5) and the CSL-Daily dataset (≥+3) com-pared to state-of-the-art gloss-free SLT methods. Further-more, our approach also achieves competitive results on the PHOENIX14T dataset when compared with most of the gloss-based methods1.*Benjia Zhou and Zhigang Chen contributed equally to this paper.†Corresponding author. 1https://github.com/zhoubenjia/GFSLT-VLPSign Language VideoMid-level  representation: GlossNACH (after)MITTAG  (midday)STARK (strong)WEHEN (blow)Sign Language Sentence und dazu kommt nachmittags dieser starke südwind . (and then there is this strong southerly wind in the  afternoon.)  (a) Gloss-based approach.SLRSLTSign Language VideoLanguage-oriented visual representationSign Language Sentence und dazu kommt nachmittags dieser starke südwind . (and then there is this strong southerly wind in the  afternoon.) SLT (b) Gloss-free approach (ours).Figure 1: Comparison of Two SLT Approaches: (a) incorporating gloss sequences as intermediates, e.g.,Sign2Gloss2Text (directly) and Sign2Text (indirectly), and (b) excluding gloss information throughout the training and inference process. 