Thanks to the rapid development of diffusion models, un-precedented progress has been witnessed in image synthe-sis. Prior works mostly rely on pre-trained linguistic mod-els, but a text is often too abstract to properly specify all the spatial properties of an image, e.g., the layout config-uration of a scene, leading to the sub-optimal results ofIn this paper, we achieve ac-complex scene generation. curate complex scene generation by proposing a seman-tically controllable Layout-AWare diffusion model, termedLAW-Diffusion. Distinct from the previous Layout-to-Image generation (L2I) methods that primarily explore category-aware relationships, LAW-Diffusion introduces a spatial de-pendency parser to encode the location-aware semantic co-herence across objects as a layout embedding and produces a scene with perceptually harmonious object styles and con-textual relations. To be specific, we delicately instantiate each object’s regional semantics as an object region map and leverage a location-aware cross-object attention mod-ule to capture the spatial dependencies among those dis-entangled representations. We further propose an adap-tive guidance schedule for our layout guidance to mitigate the trade-off between the regional semantic alignment and the texture fidelity of generated objects. Moreover, LAW-Diffusion allows for instance reconfiguration while main-taining the other regions in a synthesized image by introduc-ing a layout-aware latent grafting mechanism to recompose its local regional semantics. To better verify the plausibil-ity of generated scenes, we propose a new evaluation metric for the L2I task, dubbed Scene Relation Score (SRS) to mea-sure how the images preserve the rational and harmonious relations among contextual objects. Comprehensive ex-periments on COCO-Stuff and Visual-Genome demonstrate that our LAW-Diffusion yields the state-of-the-art genera-tive performance, especially with coherent object relations.*Corresponding author.Figure 1. Illustration of complex scene generation by Stable Diffu-sion [28] (text-to-image model) and our LAW-Diffusion (layout-to-image model). Stable Diffusion relies on linguistic model and generates an unsatisfactory scene: the boat on the water is missed and the generated building and mountain are placed with undesired spatial relation according to the input description. By contrast,LAW-Diffusion introduces a spatial dependency parser to encode the spatial semantic coherence and produces the scene image with consistent contextual relations adhere to the layout configuration. 