Semi-supervised 3D object detection from point cloud aims to train a detector with a small number of labeled data and a large number of unlabeled data. The core of exist-ing methods lies in how to select high-quality pseudo-labels using the designed quality evaluation criterion. However, these methods treat each pseudo bounding box as a whole and assign equal importance to each side during training, which is detrimental to model performance due to many sides having poor localization quality. Besides, existing methods filter out a large number of low-quality pseudo-labels, which also contain some correct regression val-ues that can help with model training. To address the above issues, we propose a side-aware framework for semi-supervised 3D object detection consisting of three key de-signs: a 3D bounding box parameterization method, an un-certainty estimation module, and a pseudo-label selection strategy. These modules work together to explicitly esti-mate the localization quality of each side and assign dif-ferent levels of importance during the training phase. Ex-tensive experiment results demonstrate that the proposed method can consistently outperform baseline models un-der different scenes and evaluation criteria. Moreover, our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on three datasets with different labeled ratios.Figure 1. The motivation of this paper. (a): Red represents pseudo-labels and green represents ground-truth. Pseudo-labels with high IoU may be incorrect on some sides, while pseudo-labels with low IoU may be correct on some sides. Global scores likeIoU are insufficient for pseudo-label selection. (b): The side qual-ity statistics of different methods for 300 scenes. The green bars indicate the number of sides with error less than 0.1, while the red bars indicate the number of sides with error greater than 0.1.The recall indicates the proportion of ground-truth that are covered by the pseudo-labels. The proposed method can effectively select sides with high quality for model training. 