Visual recognition of materials and their states is essen-tial for understanding the world, from determining whether food is cooked, metal is rusted, or a chemical reaction has occurred. However, current image recognition methods are limited to specific classes and properties and can’t handle the vast number of material states in the world. To ad-dress this, we present MatSim: the first dataset and bench-mark for computer vision-based recognition of similarities and transitions between materials and textures, focusing on identifying any material under any conditions using one or a few examples. The dataset contains synthetic and nat-ural images. Synthetic images were rendered using giant collections of textures, objects, and environments gener-ated by computer graphics artists. We use mixtures and gradual transitions between materials to allow the system to learn cases with smooth transitions between states (like gradually cooked food). We also render images with ma-terials inside transparent containers to support beverage and chemistry lab use cases. We use this dataset to train a Siamese net that identifies the same material in different objects, mixtures, and environments. The descriptor gener-ated by this net can be used to identify the states of materials and their subclasses using a single image. We also present the first few-shot material recognition benchmark with nat-ural images from a wide range of fields, including the state of foods and beverages, types of grounds, and many other use cases. We show that a net trained on the MatSim syn-thetic dataset outperforms state-of-the-art models like Clip on the benchmark and also achieves good results on other unsupervised material classification tasks. Dataset, gener-ation code and trained models have been made available at: https://github.com/ZuseZ4/MatSim-Dataset-Generator-Scripts-And-Neural-net 1Vector institute, 2University of Toronto, 3Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 4Innoviz* Equal Contributions, # Corresponding authors alan@aspuru.com, manuel@drehwald.info, sagieppel@gmail.comFigure 1. The MatSim benchmark for identifying materials from every aspect of the world using one or a few natural images (few-shot learning). Top-1 results of ConvNeXt trained on the MatSim dataset and pretrained Clip H14, on materials classes unseen dur-ing training. Only selected samples are shown. 