Point cloud completion aims to recover the complete shape based on a partial observation. Existing methods re-quire either complete point clouds or multiple partial obser-vations of the same object for learning. In contrast to pre-vious approaches, we present Partial2Complete (P2C), the first self-supervised framework that completes point cloud objects using training samples consisting of only a single incomplete point cloud per object. Specifically, our frame-work groups incomplete point clouds into local patches as input and predicts masked patches by learning prior in-formation from different partial objects. We also proposeRegion-Aware Chamfer Distance to regularize shape mis-match without limiting completion capability, and devise the Normal Consistency Constraint to incorporate a lo-cal planarity assumption, encouraging the recovered shape surface to be continuous and complete. In this way, P2C no longer needs multiple observations or complete point clouds as ground truth. Instead, structural cues are learned from a category-specific dataset to complete partial point clouds of objects. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on both synthetic ShapeNet data and real-worldScanNet data, showing that P2C produces comparable re-sults to methods trained with complete shapes, and out-performs methods learned with multiple partial observa-tions. Code is available at https://github.com/CuiRuikai/Partial2Complete.Figure 1. Conceptual comparison of point cloud completion schemes. Let x(i) k be the k-th incomplete observation of object i, while ˆy(i) and y(i) be the corresponding completed prediction and ground truth, respectively. (a) Supervised approaches rely on paired partial-complete samples. (b) Unpaired methods require partial point clouds and complete examples to guide predictions to match the input shape and follow the complete shape distribu-tion. (c) Weakly-supervised models learn completion based on (d) consistency across multi-view partial samples of an object.Our scheme differs from existing settings as only a single partial observation per object instance is available for learning. 