Human driver can easily describe the complex traffic scene by visual system. Such an ability of precise percep-tion is essential for driver’s planning. To achieve this, a geometry-aware representation that quantizes the physical 3D scene into structured grid map with semantic labels per cell, termed as 3D Occupancy, would be desirable. Com-pared to the form of bounding box, a key insight behind oc-cupancy is that it could capture the fine-grained details of critical obstacles in the scene, and thereby facilitate subse-quent tasks. Prior or concurrent literature mainly concen-trate on a single scene completion task, where we might argue that the potential of this occupancy representation might obsess broader impact. In this paper, we propose Oc-cNet, a multi-view vision-centric pipeline with a cascade and temporal voxel decoder to reconstruct 3D occupancy.At the core of OccNet is a general occupancy embedding to represent 3D physical world. Such a descriptor could be applied towards a wide span of driving tasks, including detection, segmentation and planning. To validate the effec-tiveness of this new representation and our proposed algo-rithm, we propose OpenOcc, the first dense high-quality 3D occupancy benchmark built on top of nuScenes. Empirical experiments show that there are evident performance gain across multiple tasks, e.g., motion planning could witness a collision rate reduction by 15%-58%, demonstrating the superiority of our method.Figure 1. Scene as Occupancy. Representing objects as ViDAR (a) or 3D occupancy (b) has been endorsed by industry [1, 2]. due to the fact that conventional 3D bounding box cannot describe in detail irregular vehicles in daily driving scenes, e.g., protruding tail in (a) or (c). Defining the 3D world as Occupancy in (d) serves better to represent obstacles and avoid collision. In this paper, we envision Occupancy as a general Scene Descriptor as in (e) for a wide span of driving tasks beyond detection, such as planning, and witness performance gain compared to previous alternatives. 