In this paper, we propose a new paradigm, named His-torical Object Prediction (HoP) for multi-view 3D detec-tion to leverage temporal information more effectively. TheHoP approach is straightforward: given the current times-tamp t, we generate a pseudo Bird’s-Eye View (BEV) fea-ture of timestamp t-k from its adjacent frames and utilize this feature to predict the object set at timestamp t-k. Our approach is motivated by the observation that enforcing the detector to capture both the spatial location and tem-poral motion of objects occurring at historical timestamps can lead to more accurate BEV feature learning. First, we elaborately design short-term and long-term temporal decoders, which can generate the pseudo BEV feature for timestamp t-k without the involvement of its corresponding camera images. Second, an additional object decoder is flexibly attached to predict the object targets using the gen-erated pseudo BEV feature. Note that we only perform HoP during training, thus the proposed method does not intro-duce extra overheads during inference. As a plug-and-play approach, HoP can be easily incorporated into state-of-the-art BEV detection frameworks, including BEVFormer and BEVDet series. Furthermore, the auxiliary HoP ap-proach is complementary to prevalent temporal modeling methods, leading to significant performance gains. Exten-sive experiments are conducted to evaluate the effective-ness of the proposed HoP on the nuScenes dataset. We choose the representative methods, including BEVFormer and BEVDet4D-Depth to evaluate our method. Surpris-ingly, HoP achieves 68.5% NDS and 62.4% mAP with ViT-L on nuScenes test, outperforming all the 3D object detec-tors on the leaderboard. Codes are available at https://github.com/Sense-X/HoP.*Equal contribution. Work done during internship at SenseTime Re-search. †Corresponding authors.Figure 1: Incorporating HoP into 3D object detector with other temporal fusion methods [8, 7, 32, 12, 24].Our HoP is plug-and-play and complementary to them. 