Modeling and synthesizing low-light raw noise is a fun-damental problem for computational photography and im-age processing applications. Although most recent works have adopted physics-based models to synthesize noise, the signal-independent noise in low-light conditions is far more complicated and varies dramatically across camera sen-sors, which is beyond the description of these models. To address this issue, we introduce a new perspective to syn-thesize the signal-independent noise by a generative model.Specifically, we synthesize the signal-dependent and signal-independent noise in a physics- and learning-based manner, respectively. In this way, our method can be considered as a general model, that is, it can simultaneously learn different noise characteristics for different ISO levels and generalize to various sensors. Subsequently, we present an effective multi-scale discriminator termed Fourier transformer dis-criminator (FTD) to distinguish the noise distribution accu-rately. Additionally, we collect a new low-light raw denois-ing (LRD) dataset for training and benchmarking. Qualita-tive validation shows that the noise generated by our pro-posed noise model can be highly similar to the real noise in terms of distribution. Furthermore, extensive denoising ex-periments demonstrate that our method performs favorably against state-of-the-art methods on different sensors.Figure 1. Examples of generated and denoised raw images from our proposed method. (a) Clean raw image, (b) Real noisy raw image, (c) Generated noisy raw image from our proposed noise model, (d) Denoised raw image of the denoise network [10] trained on the image generated by our noise model. Our model can generate noise at different ISO levels by a single learned noise model. The results of the visualization and quantitative metricKullback-Leibler divergence (KLD) demonstrate that the distribu-tion of the synthetic noise is close to the real noise distribution.Noise at high ISO levels drowns out the signal, resulting in unsat-isfactory image denoising. 