Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) have achieved great success in the past few years. However, most current meth-ods still require intensive resources due to ray marching-based rendering. To construct urban-level radiance fields efficiently, we design Deformable Neural Mesh Primi-tive (DNMP), and propose to parameterize the entire scene with such primitives. The DNMP is a flexible and com-pact neural variant of classic mesh representation, which enjoys both the efficiency of rasterization-based render-ing and the powerful neural representation capability for photo-realistic image synthesis. Specifically, a DNMP con-* equal contribution. This work was done when Fan interned at Shang-hai AI Laboratory. Fan’s contributions: 1) Code implementation; 2) Novel database construction for latent space training and Loss Eq. (1); 3) Con-ducted most of the experiments. Yan’s contributions: 1) Proposed DNMP.The structure design of DNMP and latent space construction for shape con-trol; 2) Proposed representing the entire scene with local primitives as well as the idea of hierarchical DNMP representation. 3) Drafted the paper and designed most of the experiments.†corresponding authors. sists of a set of connected deformable mesh vertices with paired vertex features to parameterize the geometry and radiance information of a local area. To constrain the degree of freedom for optimization and lower the storage budgets, we enforce the shape of each primitive to be de-coded from a relatively low-dimensional latent space. The rendering colors are decoded from the vertex features (in-terpolated with rasterization) by a view-dependent MLP.The DNMP provides a new paradigm for urban-level scene representation with appealing properties: (1) High-quality rendering. Our method achieves leading performance for novel view synthesis in urban scenarios. (2) Low com-putational costs. Our representation enables fast ren-dering (2.07 ms/1K pixels) and low peak memory usage (110 MB/1K pixels). We also present a lightweight version that can run 33× faster than vanilla NeRFs, which is com-parable to the highly-optimized Instant-NGP. Project page: https://dnmp.github.io/.